Safety in control systems
according to EN ISO 13849-1
Machine Safety - Jokab Safety products\n2 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1New standards for safety 
in control systems
Building a protection system that works in practice and provides sufficient safety requires expertise in several areas. 
The design of the safety functions in the protection system in order to ensure they provide sufficient reliability is a 
key ingredient. As help for this there is, for example, the EN ISO 13849-1 standard. With this document we aim to 
provide an introduction to the standard and its application in conjunction with our products.
Introducing the new standard
The generation change for standards on safety in control 
systems introduces new concepts and calculations for 
machine builders and machine users. The EN 954-1 standard 
(categories) is being phased out and replaced by EN ISO 
13849-1 (PL, Performance Level) and EN 62061 (SIL, Safety 
Integrity Level). Although the deadline for using EN 954-1 is 
set to 31/12/2011, it is beneficial to start applying the new 
standards as soon as possible as many new standards no 
longer refer to EN 954-1.
PL or SIL? What should I use?
The standard you should use depends on the choice of 
technology, experience and customer requirements. 
Choice of technology
• PL (Performance Level) is a technology-neutral concept 
that can be used for electrical, mechanical, pneumatic and 
hydraulic safety solutions. 
• SIL (Safety Integrity Level) can, however, only be used for 
electrical, electronic or programmable safety solutions.
Experience
EN ISO 13849-1 uses categories from EN 954-1 for defining 
the system structure, and therefore the step to the new 
calculations is not so great if you have previous experience 
of the categories. EN 62061 defines the structures slightly 
differently.
Customer requirements 
If the customer comes from an industry that is accustomed 
to using SIL (e.g. the process industry), requirements can 
also include safety functions for machine safety being SIL 
rated.
We notice that most of our customers prefer PL as it is 
technology-neutral and that they can use their previous 
knowledge in the categories. In this document we show 
some examples of how to build safety solutions in 
accordance with EN ISO 13849-1 and calculate the reliability 
of the safety functions to be used for a particular machine. 
The examples in this document are simplified in order to 
provide an understanding of the principles. The values used 
in the examples can change. What is PL (Performance Level)?
PL is a measure of the reliability of a safety function. PL is 
divided into five levels (a-e). PL e gives the best reliability and 
is equivalent to that required at the highest level of risk. 
To calculate which level the PL system achieves you 
need to know the following:
• The system’s structure (categories B, 1-4)
• The Mean Time To dangerous Failure of the component 
(MTTFd)
• The system’s Diagnostic Coverage (DC)
You will also need to:
• protect the system against a failure that knocks out both 
channels (CCF)
• protect the system from systematic errors built into the 
design
• follow certain rules to ensure software can be developed 
and validated in the right way
The five PL -levels (a-e) correspond to certain ranges of PFHD-
values (probability of dangerous failure per hour). These 
indicate how likely it is that a dangerous failure could occur 
over a period of one hour. In the calculation, it is beneficial 
to use PFHD-values directly as the PL is a simplification that 
does not provide equally accurate results.
What is the easiest way of complying 
with the standard?
1. Use pre-calculated components
As far as it is possible, use the components with pre-
calculated PL and PFHD-values. You then minimise 
the number of calculations to be performed. All ABB 
Jokab Safety products have pre-calculated PFHD-values.
2. Use the calculation tool
With the freeware application SISTEMA (see page 16) you 
avoid making calculations by hand. You also get help to 
structure your safety solutions and provide the necessary 
documentation.
3. Use Pluto or Vital 
Use the Pluto safety PLC or Vital safety controller. Not only 
is it easier to make calculations, but above all it is easier to 
ensure a higher level of safety.\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  3
We develop innovative products and 
solutions for machine safety
We make it easy to build protection systems. Developing 
innovative products and solutions for machine safety has 
been our business concept since the company started in 
Sweden in 1988. Our vision is to be “Your partner for machine 
safety - globally and locally”.
Many companies, both in Sweden and abroad, have 
discovered how much easier it is to build safety and 
protection systems using products and guidance from us.
The goal of our development is to ensure a high safety level 
(PL e). This is to help our customers create safe workplaces, 
regardless of who is assessing the risk level.
Experience
We have extensive experience in the practical application 
of regulations and standards from both authorities and 
manufacturing operations. We represent Sweden in the 
standards body for machinery safety and we work daily 
with the practical application of safety requirements in 
combination with production requirements. You can utilise our 
expertise for training and advice about the new Machinery 
Directive, risk analysis and safety in control systems.
Systems
We supply everything from a safety solution for a complete 
protection system installed on individual machines or entire 
production lines. We combine production requirements with 
safety requirements for production-friendly solutions.
Products
We have a complete range of safety components that 
make it easy to build protection systems. We develop these 
innovative products continuously, often in collaboration with 
our customers.
The description and example in this document show how the product works and can be used. This does not mean that it 
satisfies the requirements for all types of machines and processes. The purchaser/user is responsible for the product being 
installed and used in line with applicable regulations and standards. We reserve the right to make changes to the product and 
product sheet without prior notice.Terms as specified in EN ISO 13849-1
T10d  Mean time until 10 % of the components have a 
dangerous failure  
(Component operating time is restricted to T10d)
CCF   Common Cause Failure
DC Diagnostic Coverage 
 Divided into Low, Medium and High
PFHD  Probability of Dangerous Failure per Hour 
(Average probability of dangerous failure per hour)PL  Performance Level 
Divided into a to e
PLr Required Performance Level 
  (The required performance level for a particular 
safety function)
MTTFd  Mean Time To Dangerous Failure is divided into 
Low, Medium and High
B10d  Number of cycles until 10 % of the components 
have a dangerous failure (for pneumatic and 
electromechanical components)Contents:
Page 2    Introduction
Page 4   Work method according to EN ISO 13849-1
Page 8   Case study using RT9
Page 10    Case study using Vital
Page 12    Case study using Pluto
Page 14     What defines a safety function?
Page 16     SISTEMA
Page 17     Safety relay, Vital or Pluto?\n4 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1Risk assessment and risk minimisation
According to the Machinery Directive, the machine builder 
(anyone who builds or modifies a machine) is required to 
perform a risk assessment for the machine design and also 
include an assessment of all the work operations that need 
to be performed. The EN ISO 12100 standard (combination 
of EN ISO 14121-1 and EN ISO 12100-1/-2) stipulates the 
requirements for the risk assessment of a machine. It is 
this that EN ISO 13849-1 is based on, and a completed risk 
assessment is a prerequisite for being able to work with the 
standard.
Step 1 – Risk assessment
A risk assessment begins with determining the scope of the 
machine. This includes the space that the machine and its 
operators need for all of its intended applications, and all 
operational stages throughout the machine’s life cycle.
All risk sources must then be identified for all work 
operations throughout the machine’s life cycle.
A risk estimation is made for each risk source, i.e. indication 
of the degree of risk. According to EN ISO 13849-1 the risk is 
estimated using three factors: injury severity (S, severity), frequency of exposure to the risk (F, frequency) and the possibility you have 
of avoiding or limiting the injury (P, possibility). For each factor two 
options are given. Where the boundary between the two options 
lies is not speciﬁed in the standard, but the following are common 
interpretations:
S1  bruises, abrasions, puncture wounds and minor 
crushing injuries
S2 skeletal injuries, amputations and death
F1 less frequently than every two weeks
F2 more often than every two weeks
P1  slow machine movements, plenty of space, low 
power
P2  quick machine movements, crowded, high power
By setting S, F and P for the risk, you will get the PLr 
Performance Level (required) that is necessary for the risk 
source.
Finally, the risk assessment includes a risk evaluation 
where you determine if the risk needs to be reduced or if 
sufficient safety is ensured.Has the risk 
been adequately  
reduced?
Is the measure 
dependent on the 
control system?Start
EndAre new risks 
generated?Yes
No
YesYes
NoNoRisk assessment
Risk analysisStep 1
Step 2Determine the system's scope
(space, usage, time, environment)
Identify risk sources
(all work operations during the life cycle)
Estimate the risk
(determine PLr with S, F and P)
Evaluate the risk
(is action required?)Working method as specified in 
EN ISO 13849-1
Reduce the risk
(pre-empt, use protection, 
information)\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  5a
b
c
d
ePLr
)
)
)
)6
63
3
3
33
3
3
3Risk estimation
To calculate the performance level required (PLr).
S  Severity of injury
S1  slight (normally reversible injury)
S2 serious (normally irreversible injury or death)
F  Frequency and/or exposure to hazard
F1 seldom to less often and/or exposure time is short
F2 frequent to continuous and/or exposure time is long
P  Possibility of avoiding hazard or limiting harm
P1 possible under specific conditions
P2 scarcely possible
Step 3 - Design and calculate the safety functions
To begin with you need to identify the safety function s on the 
machine. (Examples of safety function s are emergency stop 
and monitoring of gate.)
For each safety function , a PLr should be established 
(which has often already been made in the risk assessment). 
The solution for the safety function  is then designed and 
implemented. Once the design is complete, you can 
calculate the PL the safety function  achieves. Check that the 
calculated PL is at least as high as PLr and then validate the 
system as per the validation plan. The validation checks that 
the specification of the system is carried out correctly and 
that the design complies with the specification.You will also 
need to verify that the requirements that are not included in 
the calculation of the PL are satisfied, that is, ensure that the 
software is properly developed and validated, and that you 
have taken adequate steps to protect the technical solution 
from systematic errors.Step 2 – Reduce the risk
If you determine that risk reduction is required, you must 
comply with the priority in the Machinery Directive in the 
selection of measures:
1.  Avoid the risk already at the design stage.  
(For example, reduce power, avoid interference in the danger 
zone.)
2.  Use protection and/or safety devices.  
(For example, fences, light grids or control devices.)
3.  Provide information about how the machine can be used 
safely. (For example, in manuals and on signs.)
If risk reduction is performed using safety devices, the 
control system that monitors these needs to be designed as 
specified in EN ISO 13849-1.
NoYes
YesStep 3low risk
high risk
Verify that
PL ≥ PLrIdentify the safety function s
Determine PLr
Design and implement  the 
solution for the safety function
Calculate PL
Validate
Have other 
require  ments 
been met?Are all safety functions executed?No\n6 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1PFHD PL
10-4
a
10-5
b
3x10-6
c
10-6
d
10-7
e
10-8
PL calculation in Step 3 
When you calculate the PL for a safety function, it is easiest 
to split it into separate, well defined blocks (also called 
subsystems). It is often logical to make the breakdown 
according to input, logic and output (e.g. switch - safety 
relay - contactors), but there may be more than three blocks 
depending on the connection and the number of components 
used (an expansion relay could for example create an 
additional logic block).
For each block, you calculate a PL or PFHD-value. It is 
easiest if you obtain these values from the component 
manufacturer, so you do not have to calculate yourself. The relationship between categories, the DCavg, MTTFd for each channel and PL. The table also shows the PFHD-range that 
corresponds to each PL.
The manufacturer of switches, sensors and logic devices 
often have PL and PFHD-values for their components, but 
for output devices (such as contactors and valves) you 
do not usually specify a value as it depends on how often 
the component will be used. You can then either calculate 
yourself according to EN ISO 13849-1 or use the pre-
calculated example solutions such as those from ABB 
Jokab Safety.
To calculate PL or PFHD for a block, you need to know its 
category, DC and MTTFd. In addition, you need to protect 
yourself against systematic errors and ensure that an error 
does not knock out both channels, and generate and validate 
any software used correctly. The following text gives a brief 
explanation of what to do.
Safety function (SF)
+ + PFHD, InputInput
PL/PFHD
PFHD, LogicLogic
PL/PFHD
PFHD, Output  Output
PL/PFHD
PFHD, Total =DC
noneDC
noneDC
lowDC
mediumDC
lowDC
mediumDC
high
Cat. B Cat. 1 Cat. 2 Cat. 3 Cat. 4MTTFd
low
MTTFd
medium
MTTFd
high\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  7Category 
The structure for the component(s) in the block is assessed 
to determine the category (B, 1-4) it corresponds to. For 
category 4, for example, individual failures do not result in 
any loss of the safety function.
In order to achieve category 4 with contactors, you need 
to have two channels - i.e., two contactors - that can cut the 
power to the machine individually. The contactors need to 
be monitored by connecting opening contacts to a test input 
on, for example a safety relay. For monitoring of this type 
to work, the contactors need to have contacts with positive 
opening operation.
Diagnostic Coverage (DC)
A simple method to determine DC is explained in Appendix 
E in EN ISO 13849-1. It lists various measures and what they 
correspond to in terms of DC. For example, DC=99 % (which 
corresponds to DC high) is achieved for a pair of contactors 
by monitoring the contactors with the logic device.
Mean Time To dangerous Failure (MTTFd)
The MTTFd-value should primarily come from the 
manufacturer. If the manufacturer cannot provide values, 
they are given from tables in EN ISO 13849-1 or you have 
to calculate MTTFd using the B10d-value, (average number 
of cycles until 10 % of the components have a dangerous 
If you use a safety PLC for implementing safety functions, 
this places requirements on how the software is 
developed and validated. To avoid error conditions, the 
software should be readable, understandable and be 
possible to test and maintain.
A software specification must be prepared to ensure 
that you can check the functionality of the program. It is 
also important to divide the program into modules that 
can be tested individually. Paragraph 4.6 and Appendix 
J of EN ISO 13849-1 specify requirements for safety 
related software.The following are examples of requirements for software 
from EN ISO 13849-1:
• A development life cycle must be produced with 
validation measures that indicate how and when the 
program should be validated, for example, following a 
change.
• The specification and design must be documented.
• Function tests must be performed.
• Validated functional blocks must be used whenever 
possible.
• Data and control flow are to be described using, for 
example, a condition diagram or software flow chart.Requirements for safety-related softwareCalculation of the average number of cycles is as
 follows:
dop • hop • 3600
tcyclenop =B10d
0,1 • nopMTTFd =
nop = Number of cycles per year
dop = Operation days per year 
hop = Operation hours per day
tcycle = Cycle time (seconds)failure). To calculate the MTTFd, you also need to know the 
average number of cycles per year that the component will 
execute.
With a B10d=2·106 this gives a MTTFd=1,141 year which 
corresponds to MTTFd=high. 
Note that when you calculate MTTFd you have to calculate 
according to the total number of cycles the component will 
be working. A typical example of this is the contactors that 
frequently work for several safety functions simultaneously. 
This means that you must add the number of estimated 
cycles per year from all the safety functions that use the 
contactors.
When MTTFd is calculated from a B10d-value, also consider 
that if the MTTFd-value is less than 200 years, the 
component needs to be replaced after 10 % of the MTTFd-
value (due to the T10d-value). That is, a component with 
MTTFd = 160 years needs to be replaced after 16 years in 
order for the conditions for achieving PL to continue to be 
valid. This is because EN ISO 13849-1 is based on a “mission 
time” of 20 years.
Common Cause Failure (CCF)
In Appendix F of EN ISO 13849-1 there is a table of actions 
to be taken to protect against CCF, to ensure a failure does 
not knock out both channels.
Systematic errors
Appendix G of EN ISO 13849-1 describes a range of actions 
that need to be taken to protect against incorporating faults 
into your design.
PL for safety functions
PL is given in the table on the facing page. If you want to use 
an exact PFHD-value instead, this can be produced using a 
table in Appendix K in EN ISO 13849-1.
Once you have produced the PL for each block, you can 
generate a total PL for the safety function in Table 11 of 
EN ISO 13849-1. This gives a rough estimate of the PL. If 
you have calculated PFHD for each block instead, you can 
get a total of PFHD for the safety function by adding together 
all the values of the blocks. The safety function’s total PFHD 
corresponds to a particular PL in Table 3 of EN ISO 13849-1.
Example: dop= 365 days, hop= 24 hours and tcycle= 1,800 
seconds (2 times/hour) which gives nop= 17,520 cycles. Where\n8 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1
Step 1 – Risk assessment
Food to be packaged is loaded into the cell manually through 
the rear door. A batch is prepared for the packing conveyor 
in the infeed hopper. The cell is reset and restarted. The 
packaging machine with conveyor belt only operates hen 
both doors are closed and when the protection system has 
been reset.
In the risk assessment it was established that the machine 
is to be operated in three shifts (8 hours per shift) 365 days 
a year. It is assumed that operational disturbances were 
resolved in less than one minute in the danger zone. This can 
be carried out two times per hour (F2). Unexpected start-
ups are not deemed to cause serious injury but rather minor 
healable injuries (S1). The operator is deemed not to have the 
possibility of avoiding injury as the machine moves quickly 
(P2).
The number of cycles for the safety function = 365 days/  
year · (3·8) hours/day · 2 cycles/hour = 17,520 cycles/year
The assessment for the safety function required for access 
to the machine is PLr= c (S1, F2, P2). In addition to this safety 
function, an emergency stop function is needed. This is also 
assessed as PLr=c.Example 1
Safety system using RT9
Assessment of the PLr necessary for the safety function with 
interlocked door for this example.
NOTE: The assessment needs to be made for each safety 
function.
a
b
c
d
e)
)
)
)6
63
3
3
33
3
3
3PLrlow risk
high riskProtection layout for a packaging machine with low risks.
Key switch JSNY8
Monitors that the door 
is closed.
Safety relay RT9
Monitors safety components. Emergency stop  
button
To stop the machine 
in case of danger.
Step 2 – Reduce the risk
As protection, an interlocked door is selected with the key 
switch JSNY8. Downtime is short enough for the dangerous 
movement to have stopped before the operator can access 
it. The emergency stop is placed within easy reach, on both 
sides of the cell near the locked doors. 
\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  9
*
PFHD, JSNY8  + PFHD, RT9  + PFHD, Q1/Q2  = 1,14 ·10-6 + 9,55 ·10-9+ 2,47 ·10-8 = 1,17 ·10-6  PL c
PFHD + PFHD, RT9 + PFHD, Q1/Q2 = 1,34 ·10-6 + 9,55 ·10-9 + 2,47 ·10-8 = 1,37 ·10-6  PL c
The reason for not achieving more than PL c with this solution is that you use one key switch per door. PL d could be 
achieved by using two key switches per door, but further action on the monitoring of each switch will be required as well. 
Note: If the risk assessment had shown that a serious injury, S2, could occur, the outcome would have been PLr= e.  
This would have meant that the above solution was inadequate. For the emergency stop function, PL d can be achieved 
provided that certain failure exclusions can be made. These safety functions can be downloaded from our website as a 
SISTEMA project, www.jokabsafety.com.Step 3 - Calculate the safety functions
The starting block that is composed of double unmonitored 
contactors has been calculated at 2.47·10-8. The safety 
functions are represented by block diagrams.
Safety functions 1 and 2 are identical. Therefore, only safety 
function 1 is shown.
Safety functions 3 and 4 are identical. Therefore, only safety 
function 3 is shown.* Monitoring of contactors with K1
How safe is a mechanical switch?
A mechanical switch must be installed and used according 
to its specifications in order to be reliable.
• Life expectancy only applies if correctly installed.
• The locking head must be fixed so that it will not loosen.
• The environment around the lock housing must be kept 
clean.
• Two mechanical switches on a door can also fail for the 
same reason.
PLr=cSafety function 1
B1 
Key switch
JSNY8
PL cInput
PLr=cS1
E-Stop button 
PL cInput
K1
Safety relay RT9
PL eLogic
Q1/Q2 
Redundant monitored 
contactors
PL eOutput Safety function 3Result
PL c
Result
PL cQ1/Q2 
Redundant monitored 
contactors
PL eOutput
K1
Safety relay RT9
PL eLogicS1
Emerg. StopS2
Emerg. Stop
K1
RT9
B2
Key switchB1
Key switchQ1
Contactors
Q2
Contactors\n10 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1
Step 1 – Risk assessment
The workpieces are fed into the equipment and transported 
out again following an error-free test. With the help of a 
robot the workpieces are added to a machine for testing. 
Unauthorised workpieces are positioned by the robot for 
post-machining in a manual discharge station. The work that 
needs to be done in the robot cell is to correct operational 
disturbances for the test equipment and the conveyor belt 
(about once an hour), post-machining and unloading from the 
manual station (about once an hour), program adjustments 
(once/week) and cleaning (once/week) (F2). Unexpected 
start-ups of the robot are expected to cause serious injury 
(S2). The operator is deemed not to have the possibility 
of avoiding injury as the robot moves quickly (P2). The 
assessment for the safety function required for access to the 
machine is PLr=e (S2, F2, P2).
The coming ISO 10218-2 standard for robot systems/cells 
specifies the requirement PL d for the safety functions to 
be used (if the risk analysis does not show a different PL). 
For the robot safety stop and emergency stop inputs, the 
requirement is at least PL d (according to the EN ISO 10218-1 
standard). However, in this case risk assessment  is PLr= e.
Step 2 – Reduce the risk
As protection, an interlocked door is selected with the Eden 
non-contact sensor. To protect against entering the cell the 
wrong way, transport of materials in and out is protected and 
provided with muting to distinguish between material and 
people. The emergency stop is also a safety function that is required. The power source to all hazardous machinery 
functions has to be cut using all safety functions.
The solution with Vital makes it possible to implement a 
robot application with only one safety controller, which does 
not need to be configured or programmed. Vital makes it 
possible to connect up to 30 safety functions in a single loop, 
with PL e in accordance with EN ISO 13849-1.Protection layout for a robot cell with high risks.Example 2
Safety system using Vital
Assessment of the PLr required for the safety function with 
interlocked door. 
NOTE:  The assessment needs to be made for each safety 
function.
a
b
c
d
e)
)
)
)6
63
3
3
33
3
3
3PLrlow risk
high riskEmergency stop 
button, Smile Tina
To stop the machine in 
case of danger.
Emergency stop button 
INCA Tina
To stop the machine in 
case of danger.Light curtain, Focus (with 
integrated muting function)
Prevents passage.Safety controller, Vital
Monitors safety 
components in series.Non-contact sensor, Eden
Monitors that the door is 
closed.
\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  11
PFHD, Eden + PFHD, Vital  + PFHD, Robot  = 4,5 ·10-9 + 2,74 ·10-8 + 5,79 ·10-8 = 8,98 ·10-8  PL e
PFHD, Smile Tina + PFHD, Vital  + PFHD, Robot  = 4,66 ·10-9 + 2,74 ·10-8 + 5,79 ·10-8 = 9,0 ·10-8  PL e
PFHD, Focus  + PFHD, Tina 10  + PFHD, Vital + PFHD, Robot  = 2,5·10-9 + 4,5 ·10-9 + 2,74·10-8 + 5,79 ·10-8 = 9,2310-8 PL eB3
Focus with Tina 10A
with muting unit
MF-TB4
Focus with Tina 10B
with muting unit 
MF-TS2
Smile TinaB2
Focus with Tina 10AK1
Vital
Step 3 - Calculate the safety functions
The PFHD-value of the robot’s safety stop input is 5.79·10-8 
(the value applies to ABB industrial robots with IRC5 
controller). The safety functions are represented by block 
diagrams.
These safety functions with Vital meet PL e in accordance with EN ISO 13849-1. Note that the above functions are only 
selected examples of the safety functions that is represented in the robot cell.PLr=eSafety function 1
PLr=eSafety function 2
PLr=eSafety function 3 Result
Tina 10B
PL ePL eSafety function 3
When calculating the safety function the PFHD- values 
for both the light curtain and the muting unit shall be 
included in the same function. See safety function 3 
below.
Result
PL eResult
PL e
Q1
Machine stop input 
for robot, redundant
PL eOutputQ1
Machine stop input 
for robot, redundant
PL eOutputQ1
Machine stop input 
for robot, redundant
PL eOutput
K1 
Safety controller
Vital
PL eLogic
K1 
Safety controller
Vital
PL eLogicS2 
E-Stop button
Smile Tina
PL eInputK1 
Safety controller
Vital
PL eLogic
B5
No contact safety
sensor Eden
PL eInput
B4 
Light curtain 
Focus
PL eInputB5
EdenB1
Focus with Tina 10A
S1
Inca Tina\n12 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1
a
b
c
d
e)
)
)
)6
63
3
3
33
3
3
3PLra
b
c
d
e)
)
)
)6
63
3
3
33
3
3
3PLrExample 3
Safety system using Pluto
Step 1 – Risk assessment
The workpieces to be machined are fed into the cell through a 
conveyor belt and positioned by the operator in the pneumatic 
machining tool in station 1. The operator starts station 1 
manually. The pneumatic machining tool performs work on the 
workpiece in station 1. The operator then places the machined 
workpiece on the conveyor belt for transfer to station 2. The 
robot then takes the workpiece that is placed in the hydraulic 
press. The workpiece leaves the cell by transport out onto 
the conveyor. The work that needs to be done in station 2 is, 
for example, to address operational disturbances in the press 
and the robot (a few times a week, F2).
Unexpected start-ups of the robot are expected to cause 
serious injury (S2). The operator is deemed not to have the 
possibility of avoiding injury as the robot moves quickly (P2). 
The assessment for the safety function required for access 
to station 2 is PLr=e (S2, F2, P2). This assessment would 
still be the same in respect of the press. For the safety 
function for the risks associated with the conveyor belt, the 
assessment S1, F2, P1 is made giving PLr= b.
Step 2 – Reduce the risk
As protection, interlocked doors are selected with the Eden 
non-contact sensor. Station 1 with the pneumatic machining 
tool is operated by a two-hand device. When the two-hand 
device is released, the dangerous movement will be stopped 
safely. Station 2 can be in automatic mode, when a light 
curtain (Focus) and a non-contact sensor at door 4 (Eden) 
protects the entry. If the door is opened or the light curtain is breached, station 2 stops in a safe manner. By opening 
doors 2 and 3 (also monitored by Eden) the conveyor belt 
and the pneumatic machining tool will stop safely. Manual 
reset must always be done after actuation by any safety 
device.
When the protection system requires a number of safety 
devices and that multiple machines must be checked, safety 
PLC Pluto is the most effective solution. If the protection 
system also has to work by zones and in different modes of 
operation, this is another compelling reason to use Pluto. 
With Pluto, PL e can be achieved regardless of the number of 
connected safety devices.
PLr= e for the robot and hydraulic press and PLr=b for the 
conveyor belt.Safety  PLC  Pluto
Monitors safety 
components.
Station 2
Station 1
low risk low risk
high riskhigh riskRobot Conveyor belt Door 4
Door 3
Door 2
Door 1Protection layout for a machining tool and industrial 
robot with high risks.
\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  13
Step 3 - Calculate the safety functions for the robot cell
The PFHD-value for the robot’s safety stop input is 5.79·10-8 
(the value applies to ABB industrial robots with IRC5 
controller).
Only safety functions to help cut the power to the industrial robot are shown below. This is only a subset of the safety 
functions. When the power is to be cut to multiple machines 
in a cell, the safety functions can be defined in different ways 
depending on the risk analysis. The safety functions are 
represented by block diagrams.
These safety functions with Pluto meet PL e in accordance with EN ISO 13849-1. Note that the above functions are only 
selected examples of the safety functions that appear in the robot cell.B1–B3  
Non-contact sensor  
EdenS2–S4  
Emergency stop,  
Smile Tina
Q3
Pneumatic  
machining toolQ1 
Robot
PFHD, Eden + PFHD, Pluto + PFHD, Robot  = 4,5·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 5,79·10-8 = 6,44·10-8  PL e
PFHD, Smile Tina  + PFHD, Pluto + PFHD, Robot  = 4,66 ·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 5,79 ·10-8= 6,46 ·10-8  PL e
PFHD,Focus  + PFHD, Pluto  + PFHD, Robot  = 5,02 ·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 5,79 ·10-8 = 6,49 ·10-8  PL ePLr=eSafety function 1
K1 
Safety/PlC
Pluto
PL eLogic
Q1
Machine stop input 
for robot, redundant
PL eOutput
PLr=eResult Safety function 2
PLr=e PL eTina 10A
PL eSafety function 3PL e
PL eQ1
Machine stop input 
for robot, redundant
PL eOutputResult
ResultK1 
Safety/PlC
Pluto
PL eLogic
K1 
Safety/PlC
Pluto
PL eLogicS2 
E-Stop button
Smile Tina
PL eB1
No contact safety
sensor Eden
PL e
B5 
Light curtain 
Focus
PL eInputQ2
Hydraulic pressB4-B5
Non-contact sensor
Eden/Light curtain
Focus with Tina 10AS1 
Two-hand device,
Safeball
Q1
Machine stop input 
for robot, redundant
PL eOutputInputInput\n14 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1SF1
SF3SF2K1
Logic unit
S1
E-Stop buttonF1
Light curtain
Q1
MachineB1
Interlocked switch
S1
E-Stop buttonQ3
Machine 3B1
Interlocked switchF1
Light curtainQ1
Machine 1
Q2
Machine 2K1
Logic unitWhat defines a safety function?
Multiple safety functions for a machine
Multiple safety devices are often used on a machine in 
order to provide satisfactory and practical protection for 
the operators. In the following example, the machine is 
protected by three safety devices connected to a logic 
device. The following figure illustrates this interconnection 
schematically.Calculating that you have achieved the PLr that is required is not difficult, especially if you use “pre-calculated” 
safety devices and logic units. But what parts should then be included in each safety function? This must be resolved 
before you start calculating phase. To summarise in simple terms you can say that each safety device gives rise to a 
safety function for each machine that is affected by the safety device in question. Three safety devices that all cut the 
power to three machines in a cell is therefore equal to nine safety functions. In the section that follows, we explain the 
background.
Three safety functions (SF) are defined for the machine and 
are calculated as:
SF1: PFHD, F1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q1= PFHD, SF1
SF2: PFHD, B1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q1= PFHD, SF2
SF3: PFHD, S1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q1= PFHD, SF3
Multiple safety functions for multiple machines in a cell
More commonly, several machines in a single cell/zone are to 
be protected by multiple safety devices. The following figure 
illustrates the interconnection schematically for an example. 
Each of the machines Q1 – Q3 is shut down separately and 
independently of K1.If the operator enters the cell, he is exposed in this case to 
the same type of risk from all three machines. The power to 
all three machines must be cut when the operator enters the 
cell through the door interlocked by B1.\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  15Conclusions
• Use the practical approach.
• Use safety devices/logic units with high reliability (low PFHD) to make it easy to achieve the PLr required.
• With Vital or Pluto, it is easier to achieve the PLr required.Theoretical approach for multiple machines
The theoretical approach to calculate the safety function is as 
follows:Practical approach for multiple machines
A more practical approach is to divide the safety function into 
three parts, one for each of the three machines.
This is an approach that can provide a more accurate way of 
Sources:
www.dguv.de/ifa/de/pub/grl/pdf/2009_249.pdf
www.bg-metall.de/praevention/fachausschuesse/  
infoblatt/deutsch.html  
(No 047, Date 05/2010)For the full safety function to be performed you require all 
the components to be working. Note that if B1 or K1 has a 
dangerous malfunction, the entire safety function is disabled. 
However, if for example machine Q1 has a dangerous 
malfunction, and is not shut down, machines Q2 and Q3 
will still be shut down. One disadvantage in considering 
the safety function in this way is that you may have trouble 
achieving the PLr required. But if you achieve the PLr 
required, you can use the theoretical approach.
The risk assessment for the safety functions needed for 
the risks associated with the robot was S2, F2, P2, which 
resulted in PLr=e. The same assessment was made for the 
hydraulic press: PLr=e. The assessment of the pneumatic 
machining tool is S2, F2, P1 giving PLr= d due to the fact that 
the assessment is that there is the possibility of avoiding risk.Interlock switch B1, Eden, is to cut the power to all machines 
in the danger zone: 
• Robot Q1 (PFHD, Q1 = 5.79·10-8) 
• Hydraulic press Q2 (PFHD, Q2 = 8·10-8) 
• Pneumatic machining tool Q3 (PFHD, Q3 = 2·10-7).looking at the safety functions, especially where a different 
PLr is required for the safety functions above. If machine Q1 
is a robot and machine Q2 is a conveyor which is designed 
to have negligible risks, the different PLr required to protect 
against risks from Q1 and Q2 will also be different. This 
practical approach is therefore the one recommended. 
The interpretation is based on information provided by 
IFA (Institut für Arbeitsschutz der Deutschen Gesetzlichen 
Unfallversicherung). For more information on this and other 
issues, see Sources.
Theoretical approach
If you use the practical approach the safety functions are as follows:
Robot:
PFHD, B1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q1 = 4,5·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 5.79·10-8 = 6.44·10-8  PL e
Hydraulic press:
PFHD, B1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q2 = 4.5·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 8·10-8 = 8.65·10-8  PL e
Pneumatic machining tool:
PFHD, B1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q3 = 4.5·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 2·10-7 = 2.07·10-7  PL d
This is to be done in a similar way with other safety functions for the cell. For each safety device, you define the machines it 
affects, and establish the various safety functions according to this. 
Theoretical approach
How would it have worked if you had used the theoretical approach? Would the safety function have achieved PL e?
All machines:
PFHD, B1 + PFHD, K1 + PFHD, Q1 + PFHD, Q2 + PFHD, Q3 
= 4,5 ·10-9 + 2·10-9 + 5.79 ·10-8 + 8·10-8 + 2·10-7 = 3.44 ·10-7  PL d
In this case, the safety function would therefore have not achieved a total PL e, which was required for the risks associated 
with the robot and hydraulic press. B1
Interlocked 
switchQ1
Machine 
1K1
Logic 
unitQ2
Machine 
2Q3
Machine 
3
K1
Logic unitQ3
Machine 3K1
Logic unitQ2
Machine 2B1
Interlocked switch
B1
Interlocked switch
B1
Interlocked switchK1
Logic unitQ1
Machine 1
Examples of safety functions from Case Study 3 - safety PLC Pluto\n16 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1
EN ISO 13849-1 requires calculations. To do this in a 
manageable way a software tool provides excellent help. 
ABB Jokab Safety has chosen to use SISTEMA, a software 
tool developed by BGIA, now called IFA, in Germany. The tool 
is freeware and can be downloaded from the IFA website, 
www.dguv.de/ifa. With SISTEMA it is possible to “build” 
safety functions, verify them and generate the technical 
documentation required.To work with SISTEMA in a rational way, we have developed 
a library of our products for download from our website 
www.jokabsafety.se. In order to have access to the latest 
version, visit this page periodically to check for updates and 
new releases.
To download SISTEMA go to www.dguv.de/ifa/en/pra/
softwa/sistema/index.jsp or search the Internet for “sistema”.SISTEMA
A tool for determining performance level (PL) and generating  
technical documentation
Screenshot from SISTEMA.\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  17
Pluto AS-i
To achieve PL e using a conventional safety relay, such as 
RT9, you need to use both channels on the input side and 
only connect a single safety device. Under certain conditions 
PL d can be achieved by connecting multiple two-channel 
devices to a safety relay, but this is not a generally accepted 
method. Vital is a safety controller that allows you to connect 
and monitor a variety of safety components in series, and to 
Benefits of Pluto 
• Pluto is an all-master-system with communications 
across a separate safety bus
• Greater flexibility facilitates the design of protection 
systems
• One software for all systems
• Easy programming for PL e by using function blocks 
(certified by TÜV)
More than 30,000 Pluto systems have been  
successfully installed.Benefits of Vital
• It is possible to connect up to 30 safety components 
through a channel in line with PL e
• No programming required
• The option of combining various safety components 
(e.g. emergency stop button and door contact)
• Easy configuration of the circuit
• Electromechanical switches can also be used (with 
the addition of the Tina adaptation device)
More than 70,000 Vital systems have been
successfully installed.Safety relay, Vital or Pluto?
achieve PL e to EN ISO 13849-1. The Vital module is based 
on a dynamic single-channel concept and can replace 
multiple safety relays. A similar solution, although more 
flexible, is safety PLC Pluto. Pluto, like Vital, is able to make 
use of dynamic signals to achieve maximum reliability.Various benefits in comparison to EN ISO 13849-1
Programmable
Not programmable
Safety relay
Double static inputs that 
only test the switches each 
time they are used.Vital
Dynamic "doubled up" 
safety signal that tests a 
sensor, for example, 200 
times per second.Flexibility
Number of machines/different stopsTraditional safety PLC
Master-Slave with static inputsPluto All-Master
Safety PLC with static and dynamic safety 
inputs.
SlavesMaster\n18 | Safety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1
Focus light curtain
with finger detectionProduction-friendly safety systems  
from ABB Jokab Safety
Magne magnetic lock
to keep doors closed during a process
Smile  emergency  stop
to stop machinery when there is a hazard
The Eden sensor
monitors that doors are closed
Focus light beam
to provide protection when 
entering an areaPluto Safety PLC, Vital and 
safety relays
for monitoring protection
Safeball control device
for ergonomic and safe two-handed control
Smart stopping timer
to assist in determining protection locationsQuick-Guard fencing system
prevents unauthorised access and 
offers noise reduction
3-position  devicedevice
for troubleshooting
\nSafety in control systems according to EN ISO 13849-1 |  19
AS-i
Proﬁbus DP
DeviceNet
EthernetCANopen
HMI
Product groups
Control devices
Ergonomic three-position control units,  
two-handed control units and foot 
pedals.Stopping time & machinery diagnosis
Used for stopping time measurement,  
annual maintenance and for trouble  -
shooting machinery.
Sensors/switches/locks 
Dynamic non-contact sensors, safety 
switches, magnetic switches and locks.Light curtain/light beam/scanner
Complete range of light beams, light 
curtains and scanners.Vital safety controller
Dynamic safety circuit for multiple 
protection according to the highest safety 
categoryTraining & Advice
Practical application of standards and  
regulations, along with CE-labelling.
Emergency stop devices
Emergency stop devices for dynamic and 
static safety circuits.Pluto Safety PLC
A unique All-Master safety PLC for
dynamic and static safety circuits.
Pluto AS-i
Programmable safety system AS-i where 
all units are connected to the same bus 
cable and the function of the unit is 
determined in the PLC program.
Tina adapter units 
Transformation of static signals to 
dynamic safety signals, etc.
Sadety relays
The market’s most flexible safety relays 
for different protection purposes and 
categories.
Contact strips/Bumpers/Safety mats
Sensitive edges bumpers and safetys 
mats.
Fencing systems/SafeCAD/Roller doors
A stable and flexible fencing system that 
is easy to install.
Knox safety lock
ensures that doors are lockedRoller  doors
for short protection distances 
and noise reductionSensitive edges
prevents against trapping injuriesDalton  process  lock
to keep doors closed during a process
Emergency  stop  Inca
for enclosure installation
Operational mode 
locked and reset 
Reset
Openable
Open
\nContact us
ABB AB  
Jokab Safety
Tel. +46 300-67 59 00
www.abb.com/lowvoltage
 
 2TLC172003B02002 ABB Jokab Safety, 2011