— 
ABB DRIVES 
Technical guide No. 10
Functional safety \n2
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
— 
Functional safety 
Functional safety in machinery usually 
means systems that safely monitor and,when necessary, take control of the machine applications to ensure safe operation.
Functional safety systems are designed 
to detect hazardous conditions or user’sdemand for safe state, and bring machine/process to a safe state, or to ensure thatthe desired action, such as safe stopping, takes place.\n3
— 
Table of contents
03  Contents 
04 Disclaimer
05  About this document
06  Part 1 – Theory and background
07 Safety and functional safety
08  Machinery Directive
09 Hierarchy of the European harmonized standards system
11  Part 2 – Machinery standards
11 Two standards – IEC and ISO
12 Standard for risk minimization
12 Standards for electronic safety systems
14 Product-specific safety standards (type-C standards)
14 Specific standard for safety-related drive systems
15 Standardized safety functions
19  Part 3 – Steps to meet Machinery Directive requirements
20 Step 1: Management of functional safety
21 Step 2: Risk assessment
23 Step 3: Risk reduction
25 Step 4: Establishing safety requirements
29 Step 5: Implementing a functional safety system
31 Step 6: Verifying a functional safety system
36 Step 7: Validating a functional safety system
36 Step 8: Documenting a functional safety system
37 Step 9: Proving compliance
38  Glossary
40  Index\n4
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Disclaimer
This document focuses on how to meet the European regulations and 
document therefore refers to European Machinery Directive and European 
standards. However, the European standards are inherited from the 
international ISO/IEC standards and most of the content of this document 
can be applied globally.
This document in not intended to be substitute for the original text from 
the legislation and standard, but rather as an informative overview of them.
The information and examples in this guide are for general use only and 
do not offer all of the necessary details for implementing a safety system.
ABB Oy Drives does not accept any liability for direct or indirect injury or 
damage caused by the use of information found in this document. 
The manufacturer of the machinery is always responsible for the safety of 
the product and its suitability under the applicable laws. ABB hereby 
disclaims all liabilities that may result from this document.
Note: 
Some of the content in this technical guide are extracts from ISO/IEC 
standards that is copyright protected © by International Electrotechnical 
commission (IEC) or International organization for standardization (ISO).\n55
—
About this document
This document introduces the Machinery Directive and the standards that 
must be taken into account when designing a machine, in order to ensure safe 
usage of the machine. The aim of the document is to explain, in general terms, 
how the process for meeting the requirements of the Machinery Directive is 
carried out and CE marking is obtained. CE marking indicates that the 
machinery conforms to the requirements of the Directive.
Note:
This document focuses on how to meet the European regulations and this 
document therefore refers to European Machinery Directive and European 
standards. However, the European standards are inherited from the 
international ISO/IEC standards and most of the content of this document 
can be applied globally.
The document is divided into three parts:• Part 1 – Theory and Background – introduces the idea behind functional safety 
and how to comply with the Machinery Directive. It also presents the Machinery Directive and explains the hierarchy of the European harmonized standards      
system.
• Part 2 – Machinery standards – Introduces the two standard systems and           lists a number of safety relevant standards and safety functions.
• Part 3 – Steps to Meet Machinery Directive Requirements – introduces nine     steps that help in the process of fulfilling the essential requirements of the        
Machinery Directive.\n6
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Part 1 – Theory and background
The national laws of the European Union require that machines meet the 
Essential Health and Safety Requirements (EHSR) defined in the Machinery 
Directive and in the harmonized standards (EN versions of the IEC/ISO standards) 
under the Directive. This means that all new machinery must fulfill the same legal 
requirements when supplied throughout the EU. The same standards (IEC/ISO 
versions) are also recognized in many areas outside Europe, for example through 
equivalency charts, which facilitates machinery trade and machine shipments 
between countries within and outside the EU.
Why must machinery meet these requirements? Because conformity helps to 
prevent accidents and consequent injury. Furthermore, by complying with the 
Machinery Directive and the relevant harmonized standards or outside Europe 
complying with the relevant functional safety standards, machine manufacturers 
can rest assured they have met their obligations to design and deliver safe 
machines that comply with national laws.
For manufacturers, new and improved safety strategies are becoming a way 
of improving their productivity and competitiveness in the market. The aim of conventional safety systems has been to achieve comprehensive operational 
safety and meet legal obligations. This has been done by using add-on electrical 
and mechanical components, even at the cost of productivity. Operators can, 
in certain circumstances, override these systems when attempting to improve 
productivity, which can lead to accidents.
With modern safety systems, the safety of the processes and the operator can be 
taken into account while maintaining productivity. One example of this is keeping 
the machine running but at a lower speed to maintain safe operation. With modern 
safety solutions, safety can be an integrated part of machine functionality, and
safety solutions are not just afterthoughts, added in order to meet regulations.
Safety systems can be implemented effectively through defined processes, to 
achieve specific risk reduction capability and use certified subsystems as building 
blocks for safety systems. The process concepts and the methods laid out in the 
functional safety standards are introduced in this guide. Meeting safety standards 
is expected in the industry, and certified subsystems such as drives with pre-designed safety functions are important in the industry. Machine safety is 
one of the most rapidly growing areas of importance in industrial automation.\nPART 1 – THEORY AND BACKGROUND7
—
Safety and functional safety
The purpose of safety is to protect people and the environment from accidents 
and risks caused by machines. Functional safety systems do this by lowering the 
probability of undesired events, so that mishaps are minimized when operating 
machinery. Safety standards define safety as freedom from unacceptable risk. 
Acceptable risk levels are defined by means of required risk reduction in the 
machinery safety standards. Machine builders should always use the same 
(the most stringent) acceptability criteria for all market areas, regardless of regional differences.
The most effective way to eliminate risks is to design machines to be inherently 
safe. But if risk reduction by design is not possible or practical, safeguarding 
through static guards or safety functions is often the best option. Machine safety 
functions can be used to reduce the risks caused by movement while maintainingmachine productivity, uptime and usability. At the same time, the legal obligations 
are met and the safety of people and the environment is ensured.
Functional safety in machinery usually means systems that safely monitor and, 
when necessary, take control of the machine applications to ensure safe operation. 
Functional safety systems are designed to detect hazardous conditions or user’s 
demand for safe state, and bring machine /process to a safe state, or to ensure that 
the desired action, such as safe stopping, takes place.
Monitoring typically include speed, stopping, direction of rotation, and standstill. 
When the safety system is executing an active safety function, for example moni -
toring a crawl speed, and the system behavior deviates from what is expected (for example, the system runs too fast), the safety system detects the deviation
and actively brings machine operation to a safe state. This can be done, for 
example, by stopping the machine safely and removing the torque from the 
motor shaft.
A safety system is not part of standard control system of the machine, and any 
failure in the safety system will immediately increase the risks related to machine.
This could lead in to hazardous situation as, the machine might still work normally, 
but the safety function might not be functional when it is needed. Especially in 
the high risk applications, safety system must be redundant or at least monitored, 
so that faults in the safety system can't lead to hazardous situation.\n8
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Machinery Directive
The Machinery Directive, with the harmonized standards listed thereunder, defines 
the Essential Health and Safety Requirements (EHSR) for machinery at European 
Union level. The EHSRs are listed in Annex I of the Machinery Directive.
The idea behind the Machinery Directive is to ensure that a machine is safe 
and that it is designed and constructed so that it can be used, configured and 
maintained throughout all phases of its life, causing minimal risk to people 
and the environment.
The EHSR state that when seeking solutions for designing and building safe 
machines, machine manufacturers must apply the following principles in the 
given order (also known as the 3-step method, EN ISO 12100):
1. Eliminate or minimize the hazards as much as possible by considering safety    
aspects in the machine design and construction phases (design machine to be 
inherently safe).
2. Apply the necessary protection measures against hazards that cannot be       eliminated.
3. Inform users of the risks that remain despite all feasible protection measures  being taken, while specifying any requirements for training or personal            
protective equipment.
Complying with the EHSR of the Machinery Directive allows the machine 
manufacturer to affix the CE marking on the machine. With CE marking the 
manufacturer guarantees that the product meets all regulations on the free 
movement of goods, as well as the essential requirements of the relevant 
European Directives, in this case the Machinery Directive.
Note:
There might also be other directives that apply, e.g. Low voltage directive and 
EMC directive. Only Machinery Directive requirements are covered in this guide.
Note:
CE marking according to the Machinery Directive is affixed only on a complete 
machine, not to the components of which it consists. Thus, the manufacturer of the 
product, or the representative of the manufacturer, is responsible for CE marking, 
not the manufacturer of the component that is included in the final product.
As an exception, the safety components to be used in the safety functions of 
the machine, are CE marked according to Machinery Directive by the component 
manufacturer/representative in Europe.
The machine manufacturer is responsible for carrying out the related risk analysis, 
following through the steps presented in Part 3, and ensuring compliance with the requirements. The component manufacturer is responsible for realizing the risk 
reduction capability (indicated with SIL/PL level) of the said component’s safety 
function, when the component is appropriately used. A component in this case 
could be a safety relay, or an AC drive with integrated safety functionality.\nPART 1 – THEORY AND BACKGROUND9
—
Hierarchy of the European harmonized standards system
The European Committee for Standardization, CEN, and the European Committee 
for Electrotechnical Standardization, CENELEC draw up the European “EN” 
versions of the standards, which can be then used as harmonized standards in 
all EU member countries. All harmonized standards carry the prefix “EN” 
(NOTE: not all EN standards are harmonized standards).
A list of the harmonized standards for machinery can be found on the European 
Commission Internet pages, http://ec.europa.eu .
The majority of harmonized standards are referenced by one or more Directives. 
To ensure that the essential requirements of the Machinery Directive are followed, 
it is advisable to apply the appropriate harmonized European standards. 
By designing machines according to these standards, manufacturers can demonstrate that they comply with the Machinery Directive and, generally, 
do not require certification by a third party.
B
GROUP SAFETY STANDARDS −
Concrete statements regarding basic standards
C
PRODUCT STANDARDSA
BASIC 
SAFETY STANDARDS
—
Figure 1-1: Hierarchy of European harmonized standards
• Type-C standards are specific to a machine or class of machine. If there is a 
type-C standard for a machine, the associated type-B and possibly also type-A 
standards become secondary. When designing safety functions, type-C            
standards define additional, mandatory requirements for the machines they      
are intended for. However, if no type-C standard exists for the machine, type-B 
and type-A standards offer help in designing and constructing machines that 
meet the requirements of the Machinery Directive.\n10
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
• Type-B standards deal with safety requirements that are common to the design 
of most machines. These standards give information on possible risks and how to handle them, with the help of a risk reduction process. Type-B standards can be 
divided into two groups, B1 and B2. Type-B1 standards deal with specific safety 
aspects and type-B2 standards handle safety-related  equipment in general. 
Type-B1 standards are, for example, EN/IEC EN 62061 and EN ISO 13849-1. 
Type-B2 standards include standards for defining emergency stops, such as       
EN ISO 13850.
• Type-A standards handle basic concepts, terminology and design principles. These standards alone are not sufficient to ensure conformity with the Machinery 
Directive. The only A-type standard harmonized under Machinery Directive is the 
basic safety standard for risk assessment and reduction, EN ISO 12100.
Note:
It is not mandatory to apply the harmonized standards, but they offer 
recommendations and guidance for meeting the requirements of the 
Machinery Directive, which must be conformed to.\nPART 2 – MACHINERY STANDARDS11
—
Part 2 – Machinery standards
Basic concepts, terminology and
risk assessment:
EN ISO 12100
Standard for creating safety system:
EN ISO 13849-1Standard for creating safety system:
EN/IEC 62061
Process for creating safety system Process for creating safety system
Safety system → Safe Machine → CE marking
—
Figure 2-1: Introducing standards
—
Two standards – IEC and ISO
There are two alternative standards that can be followed when implementing 
functional safety systems in compliance with the Machinery Directive: 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard and 
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standard.
Following either of the standards leads to a very similar outcome, and their 
resulting safety integrity levels (SIL) and performance levels (PL) are, in fact, 
comparable. For more information, see the comparison table in Part 3, step 6.
Note:
It is up to the machine manufacturer to decide which – if any – safety system 
creation standard is to be used (EN ISO 13849-1 or EN/IEC 62061), and then they 
shall follow the same, chosen standard all the way from beginning to end to 
ensure conformity with the said standard.
CEN standards are based on ISO standards and are basically for mechanical 
equipment – new standards have numbers in the 1xxxx series, while CENELEC 
standards are based on IEC standards – new standards have numbers in the 6xxxx series.
Note:\n12
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
ISO standards are presented in this document as EN ISO, using notation found 
in the harmonized standards list. IEC based standards are presented as EN/IEC, showing both prefixes, although the IEC standards are shown with just the 
EN prefix in the harmonized standards list (eg EN/IEC EN 62061).
—
Standard for risk minimization
Basic safety standards for risk minimization include:
• EN ISO 12100 (Safety of machinery – Basic concepts, general principles                 
for design)
EN ISO 12100 gives designers the basic terminology, a general framework and 
guidance, providing instructions and requirements for risk assessment and 
risk reduction (the three-step method).
—
Standards for electronic safety systems
The standards for electronic safety systems are as follows:
• EN ISO 13849-1 (Safety of machinery – Safety-related parts of                                 
control system – Part 1: General Principles for design),
• EN ISO 13849-2 (Safety of machinery – Safety-related parts of                                 control system – Part 2: Validation)
• EN/IEC 62061  (Safety of machinery – Functional safety of safety-related            
electrical, electronic and programmable electronic control systems),
• IEC 61508  (Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable                   
electronic safety-related systems), and
• EN/IEC 60204-1  (Safety of machinery – Electrical equipment of                                
machines – General requirements).
EN ISO 13849-1 is a standard that provides requirements to designers to make 
machines safe. These requirements include recommendations for the design, 
integration and validation of the systems. It can be used for the safety-related 
parts of control systems and various kinds of machinery, regardless of the 
technology and energy it uses. The standard also includes special requirements for safety-related parts that have programmable electronic systems. 
This standard covers the entire safety function for all devices included (a complete safety chain, for example sensor–logic–actuator).\nPART 2 – MACHINERY STANDARDS13
The standard defines how the required Performance Level (PL) is determined 
and the achieved PL verified within a system. PL describes how well a safety system is able to perform a safety function, under foreseeable conditions. There are five 
possible Performance Levels: a, b, c, d and e. Performance Level “e” provides the 
highest risk reduction capability, while PL “a” provides the lowest.
EN ISO 13849-2 specifies the validation process and required design measures/
techniques for safety functions designed according to EN ISO 13849-1.
EN/IEC 62061  is a standard for designing electrical safety systems. It is a machine 
sector specific standard within the framework of IEC 61508. EN/IEC 62061 includes 
recommendations for the design, integration and validation of safety-related 
electrical, electronic and programmable electronic control systems for machinery. 
The entire safety chain – for example sensor–logic– actuator – is covered by this 
standard. Individual subsystems need not be certified, as long as the entire safety 
function fulfills the defined requirements. However, using certified subsystems 
as building blocks is still strongly recommended, as this will potentially save 
considerable effort in the design and verification process.
Note:
Unlike EN ISO 13849-1, EN/IEC EN 62061 does not cover requirements for 
non-electrical safety-related control equipment for example hydraulic or 
pneumatic parts of safety related control system.
This standard uses a Safety Integrity Level (SIL) for complete safety functions 
and for safety subsystems (individual devices like relays). SIL is representation of 
the risk reduction capability of the safety functions/ subsystems. There are four 
possible safety integrity levels: 1, 2, 3, and 4. “SIL 4” is the highest level of safety 
integrity and “SIL 1” the lowest. Only levels 1-3 are used in machinery.
IEC 61508  is a basic functional safety standard. It covers the life cycle of systems 
comprised of electrical and/or electronic and/or programmable electronic 
components that are used to perform safety functions. IEC 61508 is not a 
harmonized standard, but it is the main standard that outlines the requirements 
and methods for designing safety related control systems with complex hardware 
and software. IEC 61508 is generally used when designing certifiable safety 
subsystems. Standards EN ISO 13849-1 and EN/IEC 62061 are based on the 
principles set in IEC 61508.
EN/IEC 60204-1  gives recommendations and requirements for the electrical 
equipment of machines in order to enhance safety and usability.\n14
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Product-specific safety standards (type-C standards)
Product-specific safety standards, known as type-C standards, handle a specific 
machine or class of machines and are based on a presumption of conformity with 
respect to the EHSRs covered by the standard.
It should be noted that:• The requirements specified in the type-C standards generally overrule                   
the requirements set by the general safety standards (EN/IEC 62061,                      
EN ISO 13849-1, etc.).
• Type-C standards may have set SIL/PL requirements for specific safety functions. At least these requirements must be met, regardless of the results of the risk     
assessment (however a risk assessment must always be conducted as well).
Note:Even if the lists of hazards possibly affecting the machine, composed during 
the risk assessment, and the type-C standard are identical, the standard may not 
take account of all of the relevant EHSRs. The standard must always be inspected 
thoroughly to determine what hazards might have been excluded from the list.
—
Specific standard for safety-related drive systems
A specific standard for safety-related drive system is:
• EN/IEC 61800-5-2  (Adjustable speed electrical power drive systems – functional 
safety requirements).
EN/IEC 61800-5-2  gives specifications and recommendations for power drive 
systems used in safety-related applications. It is a product standard that presents 
safety-related aspects in terms of the framework of IEC 61508, and introduces 
requirements for power drive systems when used as subsystems in safety systems.\nPART 2 – MACHINERY STANDARDS15
—
Standardized safety functions
Standard EN/IEC 61800-5-2 defines safety functions for drive systems. A drive may 
offer one or more of these functions. Here are some examples:
Safe torque off (STO)
When activated, this function brings the machine safely into a non-torque state 
and/or prevents it from starting accidentally.
Note:  Safe torque off does not protect against electrical hazards.
|n|
0
tFunction requested
Safe stop 1 (SS1-t), time monitored
this function initiates the motor deceleration and performs the STO function after 
an application specific time delay.
|n|
0
t time limitFunction requested
Safe stop 1 (SS1-r), ramp monitored
This function initiates and monitors the motor deceleration rate within selected 
limits to stop the motor, and performs the STO function when the motor speed is 
below a specified limit.
|n|
0
tFunction requested
 Safe stop 2 (SS2)
When activated, this function stops the motor safely, initiating the SOS function 
below a specified speed or after a defined time limit.\n16
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Safe operating stop (SOS)
When active, this function keeps the motor in a safe standstill while holding the motor torque.
Safely-limited speed (SLS)
When active, this function prevents the motor from exceeding 
the defined speed limit.
|n|
0
tFunction requested
 Safe direction (SDI)
When active, this function prevents the motor shaft from moving 
in an unwanted direction.
|n|Function requested
0
t
 Safe brake control (SBC)
When active, this function provides a safe output for controlling
external (mechanical) brakes.
FSO-12 SAFETY MOD ULE BRAKE RELAY MECHANICAL BRAKEOutput A
Output BON
OFF
ON
OFFM+
Feedba ck+
 Safe speed monitor (SSM)
When active, this function provides a safe output indicating that
the speed is under the specified speed limit.
|n|
0
tOutput active
Function requested
 See standard EN/IEC 61800-5-2 for more examples of safety functions.\nPART 2 – MACHINERY STANDARDS17
Note:
Functions SOS, SLS and SDI of the above functions are monitoring functions, ie they monitor that movement or standstill remains within defined limits. 
If these functions detect that movement is not within a defined limit, they 
activate a fault reaction function, which typically is Safe torque off (STO).
Emergency operations
Standard EN/IEC 60204-1 defines two emergency operations, emergency 
switching-off and emergency stop.
Emergency switching-off
The emergency switching-off function disconnects power to a system or 
part of it should the risk of an electric shock arise. 
This function requires external switching components, that meet the requirements 
for an isolation device and can not be accomplished with safe torque off (STO) .
Emergency stop
An emergency stop must operate in such a way that, when it is activated, the 
hazardous movement of the machinery is stopped and the machine is unable to 
start under any circumstances, even after the emergency stop is released. 
Releasing the emergency stop only allows the machine to be restarted.
• The emergency stop can stop hazardous movement by applying the following   
actions:
 -optimal deceleration rate until the machine stops
 -by using one of the two emergency stop categories, 0 or 1, or
 -by employing a predefined shutdown sequence.
Emergency stop, stop category 0  (according to EN/IEC 60204-1) means that the 
power to the motor is cut off immediately. Stop category 0 is equivalent to the safe 
torque off (STO) function, as defined by standard EN/IEC 61800-5-2.
Emergency stop, stop category 1  (according to EN/IEC 60204-1) means that the 
machine speed is brought to a standstill through controlled deceleration and then 
the power to the motor is cut off. Stop category 1 is equivalent to the safe stop 1 
(SS1) function, as defined by standard EN/IEC 61800-5-2.
When actuated, the emergency stop function must not create any additional 
hazards or require any further involvement by the machine operator.
Note:
The principles for the design of an emergency stop function are introduced in 
standard EN ISO 13850.\n18
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Prevention of unexpected startup
Ensuring that a machine remains stopped when persons are present in danger area is one of the most important conditions in safe machines.
The Safe torque off (STO) function can be used to effectively implement the 
prevention of unexpected startup functionality, thus making stops safe by 
preventing the power only to the motor, while still maintaining power to the main 
drive control circuits. Prevention of unexpected startup requires for example a 
lockable switch in addition to the STO function.
Devices that do not fulfil the isolation function (e.g. or Power Drive System (PDS) 
with a Safe Torque Off (STO) function in accordance with IEC 61800-5-2) may only 
be used for prevention of unexpected start-up during tasks such as:
• inspections;
• adjustments;
• work on the electrical equipment where:
 -there is no hazard arising from electric shock and burn;
 -the switching off means remains effective throughout the work;
 -the work is of a minor nature (for example, replacement of plug-in                         devices   without disturbing existing wiring).
The principles and requirements of the prevention of unexpected startup 
are described in the standards EN/IEC 60204-1, EN 1037. Another standard covering the prevention of unexpected startup is ISO 14118.\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS19
—
Part 3 – Steps to meet Machinery Directiverequirements
The Machinery Directive requires machinery to be safe. However, there is 
no such thing as zero risk. The objective is to minimize the risk.
Compliance with the Machinery Directive can be achieved:• by meeting the requirements set by the harmonized standards or
• by having a machine acceptance investigation carried out by an                                
authorized third party.
The process for fulfilling the EHSRs of the Machinery Directive using                         
harmonized standards can be divided into nine steps:
• Step 1: Management of functional safety – managing functional safety          
during the life cycle of the machine.
• Step 2: Risk assessment – analyzing and evaluating risks.
• Step 3: Risk reduction – eliminating or minimizing risks through design                
and documentation.
• Step 4: Establishing safety requirements – defining what is needed                 
(functionality, safety performance) to eliminate the risk or reduce it to                    
an acceptable level.
• Step 5: Implementing a functional safety system – designing and                          creating safety functions.
• Step 6: Verifying a functional safety system – ensuring that the safety                system meets the defined requirements.
• Step 7: Validating a functional safety system – reviewing implemented          safety system against the risk assessment and making certain that the            
safety system actually succeeded in reducing risks as specified.
• Step 8: Documenting a functional safety system – documenting the                      design, producing user documentation.
• Step 9: Providing compliance – proving the machine’s compliance with             EHSR of the Machinery Directive through compliance assessment and                        
a technical file.
Each of these steps is explained in more detail in the following chapters.\n20
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Updating existing machinery
The following issues must be considered when updating safety requirements 
for existing machines:
• For machines that already have a CE marking – new components that are added  
to the machine must also have a CE marking according to relevant directives such 
as Low Voltage Directive and EMC directive(safety components also according    
to Machinery directive). It must be case-specifically defined how the new         
components are applied to the old system according to the Machine Directive.
• For machines that do not have a CE marking – the safety level of the machine can be maintained by replacing components with new ones that have a CE marking.
Ultimately, it is the relevant authority’s decision as to whether the change was 
extensive enough to require an update of the safety level.
Machinery
Directive
(EHSR)Risk 
assessment & 
evaluation, risk 
reduction
Architecture,
subsystems,
safety / reliability
parameters
Functional
testing,
achieved
SIL / PL level
Does the
function fulfill the
risk reduction
requirement?Documenting
the design,
residual risk,
user instructionsCompliance
assessment,
technical file,
documentationSpecification
- Functionality
- Safety performance
(SIL, PLT)LAWS, REQUIREMENTS RISK IDENTIFICATION
Steps 
2 - 3 Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8Step 9SAFETY FUNCTION
IMPLEMENTATION
VERIFICATION
VALIDATION
DOCUMENTATIONCOMPLIANCEStep 1
Management of 
functional safety
—
Figure 3-1: Process flow for meeting Machinery Directive requirements
—
Step 1: Management of functional safety
To achieve the required functional safety, it is necessary to implement a project 
management and quality management system that is compliant to, for example, 
IEC 61508 or ISO 9001 standards. This management system can be specified
in the form of a safety plan.\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS21
Safety plan
Standard EN/IEC 62061 specifies a safety plan for the process for meeting the requirements of the functional safety part of Machinery Directive. 
This plan needs to be created and documented for each safety system and 
updated, when necessary.
• Safety plan:
 -identifies all relevant activities,
 -describes the policy and strategy for fulfilling functional safety requirements,
 -identifies responsibilities,
 -identifies or establishes procedures and resources for documentation,
 -describes strategy for configuration management, and
 -includes plans for verification and validation.
Note:
Even though the activities listed above are not particularly specified in 
EN ISO 13849-1, similar activities are needed to fully meet the requirements of 
the Machinery Directive.
When the safety plan (according to EN/IEC 62061) has been created, 
risk assessment starts.
—
Step 2: Risk assessment
The risk assessment is a process whereby risks are analyzed and evaluated. A risk is 
a combination of the consequence of harm (ie how severe is the injury or damage 
should the hazard lead to an accident) and the probability of the harm occurring 
when exposed to a hazard.
Note:
According to the Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC, it is mandatory to perform and 
document a risk assessment for a machine. The Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC 
requires that manufacturers perform risk assessments and take the results into 
account when designing a machine. All risks must be assessed and if necessary, 
they must be reduced to an acceptable level using design changes or by applying 
appropriate safeguarding techniques.
The risk assessment process according to EN ISO 12100 consists of two parts: 
risk analysis and risk evaluation. Risk analysis means identifying and estimating 
the risks and risk evaluation means deciding whether the risk is acceptable or 
risk reduction necessary.
Risk evaluation is carried out based on the results of the risk analysis. Decisions on 
the necessity of risk reduction are made according to the risk evaluation procedure.
Note:
Risk evaluation must be carried out separately for each hazard.\n22
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Four steps of risk analysis:
1. Determine the limits and intended use of the machine.• These limits include:
 -limits of use
 -space limits
 -ambient or environmental limits
 -lifetime limits
2. Identify the hazards that might be generated by the machine.
3. Estimate identified risks one at a time.
• Severity of the risk (potential consequences)
• Probability of the risk (Frequency, Probability, Avoidance)
4. Evaluate the risk: Is risk reduction necessary?• YES:  Apply r isk reduction measures and return to step 2 in the risk analysis.
Note:  
The 3-step method for risk reduction according to EN ISO 12100 is presented in the next chapter.
• NO:  Risk reduction target is met and risk assessment process ends.
Document the risk assessment process and its results for each individual hazard.
Risk assesment
   1.   Determine limits / intended use
    of the machine
   2.   Identify Hazards
   3.   Estimate risks one at a time
   • Severity and Probability
   4.  Evaluate the risk:
       Risk low enough (yes / no)
YES
To risk reductionNO
(See figure 3-3)
EndDocumentationFrom risk reductionNO
(See figure 3-3)
From risk reductionYES
—
Figure 3-2: Risk assessment and evaluation according to EN ISO 12100\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS23
After the risk assessment has been carried out and documented, there are 
two options, depending on the outcome of the assessment:
• Option 1
If the assessment reached the conclusion that risk reduction was not needed, 
the machine has reached the adequate level of safety required by the 
Machinery Directive.
Note:
All residual risks must be documented in the appropriate operation and 
maintenance manuals. There is always some residual risk.
• Option 2
If the assessment revealed that the risk remains unacceptable, the process for 
risk reduction is started.
—
Step 3: Risk reduction
The most effective way to minimize the risks is to eliminate them in the design 
phase, for example by changing the design or the work process of the machine. 
If this is not possible, one way to carry out the risk reduction process and ensure 
conformance with the requirements is to apply suitable harmonized standards
under the Machinery Directive.
If the risk assessment process concludes that risk reduction is needed, a strategy 
for risk minimization is created. According to standard EN ISO 12100, risk reduction 
can be divided into three steps (the three-step method):
3-step method
1. Inherently safe design measures – creating a safer design, changing the process, 
eliminating the risk by design.
2. Safeguarding and complementary protective measures – guards and protective devices (safety functions).
3. Information on use (residual risk management):
 -on the machine – warning signs, signals and warning devices – and
 -in the operating instructions.\n24
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
3.
Processes,
information 
for useRisk reduction
by functional safetyRisk reduction
by design changes
2.
Safety 
technology
(Functional 
Safety)1.
Design 
changes(To figure 3-2)
(From figure 3-2)Risk reduction
YES3 - STEP METHODApply risk reduction 
measures
NO
NO
Risk reduction
by processes & infoYES
YES
YESNO
NO
NO
NOAdequate
reduction
(Y /N)??
?
?
—
Figure 3-3: The 3-step method for risk reduction according to EN ISO 12100
Residual risk is the risk that remains when all protective measures have been 
considered and implemented. Using technology, it is not possible to achieve 
a state of zero risk, since some residual risk always remains.
All residual risks must be documented in the operating instructions.\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS25
The user’s part of risk reduction includes information given by the designer 
(manufacturer). Risk reduction measures for the machine user/organization are as follows:
• Risk reduction measures typically taken by the organization:
 -introducing safe working procedures
 -work supervision
 -permit-to-work systems
• Provision and use of additional safeguards
• Use of personal protective equipment
• Training users
• Reading operating and safety instructions and acting accordingly.
Designers should also seek valuable user input when defining protective measures.
When the risk reduction has been executed, it must be examined to ensure that 
the measures taken were adequate for reducing the risk to an appropriate level. 
This can be done by repeating the risk assessment process.
The following, remaining steps describe option 2 of the 3-step method: 
safeguarding through a functional safety solution.
—
Step 4: Establishing safety requirements
After all the risk reduction that can be undertaken through design changes has 
been performed, additional safeguarding needs to be specified. Functional safety 
solutions can be used against the remaining hazards as an additional risk 
reduction measure.
Safety functions
A safety function is a function, which must function properly and provide designed 
protection for the user of the machine. Failure of such function can put machine 
users in immediate risk as the safe usage of the machine might be endangered. 
Simply put, it comprises the measures that must be taken to reduce the likelihood 
of an unwanted event occurring during exposure to a hazard. A safety function is 
not part of machine operation itself. This means that if the safety function fails, 
the machine can operate normally, but the risk of injury from machine operation 
increases.
Defining a safety function always includes two components:
• required action  (what must be done to reduce the risk) and
• safety performance  (Safety Integrity Level – SIL or Performance Level – PL).
Note:It is also important to specify the timing requirements for the safety function, 
ie the maximum allowed time to bring the system into a safe state.\n26
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Also the environment for the safety system has to be specified, so that suitable 
safety components can be selected.
Note:
A safety function must be specified, verified (functionality and safety performance) 
and validated separately for each identified hazard.
Example of a safety function:
Risk, which requires risk reduction:  An exposed rotating shaft may cause an injury 
if one gets too close to the shaft.
Action:  In order to prevent personal injury from the shaft, the motor must stop in 
one (1) second, when the safety gate is opened.After the safety function that executes the action has been defined, the required 
safety level is determined for it.
Safety performance/integrity
Safety integrity measures the performance of a safety function. It presents 
the likelihood of the safety function being achieved, upon request. The required 
safety integrity for a function is determined during the risk assessment and is 
represented by the achieved Safety Integrity Level (SIL) or Performance Level (PL), 
depending on the standard used.
The two standards use different evaluation techniques for a safety function, 
but their results are comparable. The terms and definitions are similar for 
both standards.
Determining the required SIL (EN/IEC 62061)
The process for determining the required safety integrity level (SIL) is as follows:
1. Determine the severity of the consequence of a hazardous event.
2. Determine the point value for the frequency and duration a person is exposed   to the harm.
3. Determine the point value for the probability of the hazardous event occurring when exposed to it.
4. Determine the point value for the possibility of preventing or limiting                  the scope of the harm.
Tip:
Determining the required SIL can be conveniently done with ABB Functional safety design tool (FSDT) PC-tool.
Example:
The parameters used in determining the point values are presented in 
the following example of an SIL assignment table.\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS27
SIL
Class
3-4 5-7 8-10 11-13 14-15
SIL2 SIL2 SIL2 SIL3 SIL3
OM SIL1 SIL2 SIL3
OM SIL1 SIL2
OM SIL1SEVERITY of harm
Se
Consequences (severity)
Death, losing and eye or arm 4
Permanent, losing fingers 3
Reversible, medical attention 2
Reversible, first aid 1Fr
Frequency, duration
<= hour 5
> 1h <= day 5
> day <= 2 wks 4
> 2 wks <= 1 yr 3
> 1 yr 2Av
Avoidance
Impossible 5
Possible 3
Likely 1Pr
Probability of hazardous event
Very high 5
Likely 4
Possible 3
Rarely 2
Negligible 1
5 +3+3=1 1PROBABILITY OF OCCURENCE of harm
A SIL2
safety  
function
is required
—
Figure 3-4: Example of SIL assignment table (based on EN/IEC 62061, tables A.1-A.4; A.6)
In this example, the hazard analysis is carried out for an exposed rotating shaft.
1. Severity (Se) = 3. The consequence of the hazard is permanent injury,                 
possibly losing fingers.
2. Frequency (Fr) = 5. A person is exposed to the hazard several times a day.
3. Probability (Pr) = 3. It is possible that the hazard will take place.
4. Avoidance (Av) = 3. The hazard can be avoided.
 -5 + 3 + 3 = 11, with the determined consequence, this equals SIL 2.
The tables used for determining the points are presented in the standard.
After the required SIL has been defined, the implementation of the safety system 
can begin.\n28
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Determining the required PL (EN ISO 13849-1)
To determine the required PL, select one of the alternatives from the following categories and create a “path” to the required PL in the chart.
1. Determine the severity of the damage.
The severity parameters are
S1 – slight, usually reversible injury
S2 – severe, usually irreversible injury, including death
2. Determine the frequency and duration of exposure to the hazard.
The frequency and duration parameters are
F1 – rare to often and/or short exposure
F2 –frequently to continuous and/or long exposure
3. Determine the possibility of avoiding hazard or limiting  harm.
The hazard avoiding and harm limiting parameters are
P1 – possible under specific conditions
P2 – scarcely possible
Note:
The probability of avoiding the hazard and the probability of occurrence of a 
hazardous event are both combined in the parameter P. P1 should only be selected 
if there is a realistic chance of avoiding a hazard or of significantly reducing its effect; otherwise P2 should be selected. Where probability of occurrence of a 
hazardous event can be justified as low, the PLr may be reduced by one level 
(see 13849-1 for more information).
Tip:
Determining the required PL can be conveniently done with ABB Functional safety 
design tool (FSDT) PC-tool.
Example:
The resulting performance level is represented by a, b, c, d and e in the following 
example of the PL risk graph.
Start
here
High riskLow risk
S1
Slight
S2
SevereF1
Rare to often
Possible
Scarcely possibleF2F1
F2
P2P1P2P2P2
P1P1P1
Freq. to cont.a
b
c
ed
—
Figure 3-5: Example of PL risk graph (based on EN ISO 13849-1, figure A.1)A PL d
safety  
function
is required\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS29
In this example, the hazard analysis is carried out for an exposed rotating shaft.
• The consequence of the hazard is a severe, irreversible injury.
Severity = S2.
• A person is exposed to the hazard several times a day.Frequency = F2.
• It is possible to avoid or limit the harm caused by the hazard.Possibility = P1.
The path leads to PL value d. The tables used for determining the points are 
presented in the standard. After the PL has been defined, the implementation 
of the safety system can begin.
—
Step 5: Implementing a functional safety system
When designing and constructing a safety function, the idea is to plan and 
construct the safety function in order to meet the required SIL/PL specified for 
the function (as shown in the previous chapter). Using certified subsystems in 
functional safety systems can save the safety system designer a lot of work.
Implementing safety functions becomes more convenient when some of the 
safety and reliability calculations are already made and subsystems are certified.
Note:
SIL/PL of the whole safety function must be assessed, calculated and verified. 
If safety function includes components (subsystems), which are not certified by 
component manufacturer, it is necessary to carry out SIL/PL assessment including 
safety calculations for each of the subsystems. Standards EN/IEC 62061 and 
EN ISO 13849-1 include information on the process and calculation data needed.
Implementation and verification processes are iterative and run parallel with each 
other. The idea is to use verify during implementation to ensure that the safety 
functionality and SIL/PL level reached with the implemented system. For more 
information on the verification processes, see the next step.
ABB’s Functional safety design tool (FSDT-01) is a PC-tool available for establishing 
a SIL/PL target for a safety function, as well as to design, verify the achieved SIL/PL 
and document the safety function.\n30
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
The general steps for implementing a functional safety system include:
1. Defining the safety requirements in a form of SIL or PL, according to standard 
EN/IEC 62061 or EN ISO 13849-1.
2. Selecting the system architecture to be used for the safety system and        
subsystems.
EN/IEC 62061 and EN ISO 13849-1 standards offer basic architectures with 
calculation formulas.
• Category B, 1, 2, 3 or 4, as presented in standard EN ISO 13849-1, or
• designated architecture A, B, C or D, as presented in standard EN/IEC 62061 for the subsystems.
For more information on designated architectures, see the respective standards.
3. Constructing the system from safety-related subsystems – sensor/switch,     
input, logic, output, and actuator.
• Either:
 -by using certified subsystems (recommended) or
 -by performing SIL/PL assessment and safety calculations for                         
each subsystem.
The safety level of the complete safety function is established by adding together the subsystem safety levels.
4. Installing the safety system.
The system needs to be installed properly to avoid common failure possibilities 
due to improper wiring, environmental, or other such factors. A safety system 
that is not performing correctly due to careless installation is of little or no use, 
or even poses a risk in itself.
5. Verifying the functionality of the system.
Gate limit switches
Subsystem 1Safety logic + I/O
Subsystem 2Actuator
(Safe torque off, STO)
Subsystem 3
—
Figure 3-6: Structure of a safety function\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS31
—
Step 6: Verifying a functional safety system
Verification of the functional safety system demonstrates and ensures 
that the implemented safety system meets the requirements specified for 
the system in the safety requirements phase.
Verification should not be carried out after the implementation process, 
but together with it as an iterative process, so that the implementation can 
indeed produce a system that will meet the specified requirements.
In addition to verifying the achieved SIL or PL of the system, the correct operation 
of the safety system must also be verified by carrying out functionality testing.
Verifying SIL of safety function (EN/IEC 62061)
To verify safety integrity levels, it must be shown that the safety performance, 
in other words the risk reduction capability, of the created safety function is equal 
to or greater than the required performance target set during the risk evaluation. 
Using certified subsystems is advisable, because the manufacturer has already 
defined values for determining (systematic) safety integrity (SIL) and probability 
of dangerous faliures per hour (PFHd) for them.
Tip:Verifying the achieved SIL can be conveniently done with ABB Functional safety 
design tool (FSDT) PC-tool.
1. Determine safety integrity level (SIL) for the each subsystem by 
a) using certified safety components, which have already SIL and PFH
d-value                
defined by manufacturer, or
b) using components, where manufacturer has not defined SIL and PFHd-value. 
In this case, designer must determine SIL and PFHd-value for subsystem 
through architectural structures, which were presented in step 5. Through the 
structure and component manufacturer data, it is possible to determine safe 
failure fraction (SFF), hardware failure tolerance (HFT) and PFHd-value. These 
values will eventually define, which SIL can be reached, with that subsystem, 
when these values are compared to tables 3 and 5 in EN/IEC 62061.  
2. Use the Common Cause Failure (CCF) checklist to make sure that all the        
necessary aspects to prevent common cause failure in the safety circuit      
have been considered.
CCF checklist tables can be found in EN/IEC 62061 standard, Annex F.
Calculating the points according to the list and comparing the overall score to 
the values listed in the standard EN/IEC 62061 Annex F, Table F.2 results to the 
CCF factor (β). This value is used for estimating the probability value of PFHd.\n32
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
3. Calculate overall PFH-value for the safety functions by summing up                    
PFHd-values of each subsystem.
4. Compare the overall PFHd-value of the safety function to the table 3-1              
(table 3 in EN/IEC 62061) to verify, what SIL the safety function is fulfilling.
Note: 
Lowest SIL of the subsystem in the safety function, will be the highest achievable 
SIL for the safety function.
It is also important to take into account systematic failures as required in 
EN/IEC 62061. These are commonly human mistakes in the design process. 
To take care of these, it is normally necessary to have functional safety and 
quality management systems to make sure that all systematic failures 
can be minimized. 
Example of verifying SIL (Calculation data is fictional):
Verifying the rotating shaft functional safety system:
Gate limit switches
Subsystem 1Safety logic + I/O
Subsystem 2Actuator
(Safe torque off, STO)
Subsystem 3
SIL = 2PFH
d = 2.4 x 10-7SIL = 3PFH
d = 9.8 x 10-9SIL = 3PFH
d = 2.0 x 10-10
—
Figure 3-7: Example verification of SIL
• Systematic safety integrity:
SILsys ≤ (SILsubsystem)lowest -> SIL 2
• Random hardware safety integrity:PFH
d = PFHd1 + PFHd2 + PFHd3 = 2.5 x 10-7
2.5 x 10-7 < 10-6  = the system meets SIL 2\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS33
Table for determining SIL according to PFHd value obtained from the whole safety 
system (in high demand/continuous mode):
SIL Probability of dangerous failures per hour (1/h)
SIL 1 ≥ 10-6 up to < 10-5
SIL 2 ≥ 10-7 up to < 10-6
SIL 3 ≥ 10-8 up to < 10-7
—
Table 3-1: Table for determining SIL (based on EN/IEC 62061, table 3)
Verifying PL of safety function (EN ISO 13849-1)
To verify the performance level, it must be established that the achieved PL of 
the corresponding safety function matches the required PL. If several subsystems 
form one safety function, their performance levels must be equal or greater 
than the performance level required for the said safety function. Using certified 
subsystems is advisable, because the manufacturer has already defined values 
for determining performance level (PL) and probability of dangerous faliures 
per hour (PFHd) for them.
1. Determine performance level (PL) for the each subsystem bya) using certified safety components, which have already PL and PFH
d-value         
defined by manufacturer, or
b) using components, where manufacturer has not defined PL and PFHd-value. 
In this case, designer must determine PL and PFHd-value for the subsystem.  
To determine PL and PFHd-value for subsystem, it is necessary first to define 
these for each subsystem:
- Category
- Mean Time To dangerous Failure (MTTFd)
- Diagnostic Coverage (DC)
Note:
According to EN ISO 13849-1 MTTFd is used in defining PL and PFHd for subsystem. 
PFHd is used for defining PL for whole system!
After all these needed information is determined, designer must compare these 
values to the table of Annex K of EN ISO 13849-1 to see, which PL and PFHd-value 
the subsystem is actually fulfilling.
More information related to this can be found from EN ISO 13849-1.\n34
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
2. Use the Common Cause Failure (CCF) checklist to make sure that all the         
necessary aspects to prevent common cause failure in the safety circuit       have been considered.
CCF checklist tables can be found in EN ISO 13849-1 standard, Annex F. 
The required minimum score is 65 points.
3. When all subsystems have PL and PFH
d-values, calculate overall PFHd-value    
for the safety functions by summing up PFHd-values of each subsystem.
4. Compare the overall PFHd-value of the safety function to the table 3-2             
(table 3 in EN ISO 13849-1) to verify, what PL the safety function is fulfilling.
Note: Lowest PL of the subsystem in the safety function, will be the highest achievable 
PL for the safety function.
It is also important to take into account systematic failures as required in 
EN ISO 13849-1. These are commonly human mistakes in the design process. 
To take care of these, it is normally necessary to have functional safety and 
quality management systems to make sure that all systematic failures can be 
minimized.
Tip:
Verifying the achieved PL can be conveniently done with ABB Functional 
safety design tool (FSDT) PC-tool.\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS35
Table for determining PL according to PFHd value obtained for 
the whole safety function:
PL Probability of dangerous failures per hour (1/h)
a ≥ 10-5 up to < 10-4
b ≥ 3 x 10-6 up to < 10-5
c ≥ 10-6 up to < 3 x 10-6
d ≥ 10-7 up to < 10-6
e ≥ 10-8 up to < 10-7
—
Table 3-2: Table for determining the PL (based on EN ISO 13849-1, table 3)
Comparing SIL and PL values
Although methods of evaluation differ between the two standards, the evaluation 
results can be compared on the basis of risk reduction capability.
Safety integrity level SIL Performance level PL
no correspondence a
1 b
1 c
2 d
3 e
—
Table 3-3: The resulting risk reduction capability of SIL and PL (based on EN ISO 13849-1, table 4)
Note: 
To compare SIL to PL, it is necessary to have the category information based on 
13849-1 available.\n36
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Step 7: Validating a functional safety system
Each safety function must be validated in order to ensure that it reduces risk 
as required in the risk assessment phase.
Very important aspect when validating functional safety system is functional 
testing of it. Functional testing of the safety functions in all operating modes 
of the machine, to establish whether they meet the specified characteristics. 
The functional tests shall ensure that all safety-related outputs are realized over their complete ranges and respond to safety-related input signals in accordance 
with the specification. For further information, see EN ISO 13849-2 and 
EN/IEC 62061, chapter 8.
In order to determine the validity of the functional safety system, the system must 
be inspected against the risk assessment process carried out at the beginning of the procedure for meeting the EHSR of the Machinery Directive (see step 2 page 21). 
The system is valid, if it truly reduces the risks analyzed and evaluated in the risk 
assessment process.
—
Step 8: Documenting a functional safety system
The design of the machine must be documented and relevant user documentation 
produced before the machine fulfills the requirements set in the Machinery 
Directive.
Documentation needs to be carefully produced to serve its purpose. It has to be 
accurate and concise, but at the same time informative and easy for the user to 
understand. All residual risk must be documented in the user documentation, 
withproper instructions on how to operate the machine safely. The documentation 
must be accessible and maintainable. The user documentation is delivered with 
the machine.
For more information on the documentation required and its nature, see the 
EHSR in Annex I of the Machinery Directive.\nPART 3 – STEPS TO MEET MACHINERY DIRECTIVE REQUIREMENTS37
—
Step 9: Proving compliance
Before a machine can be placed on the market, the manufacturer must ensure that 
the machine is implemented in conformance with harmonized standards. It must 
also be proved that the combination for each safety function of the safety-related 
parts meets the defined requirements.
To prove the conformance with the Machinery Directive, it must be shown that:
• Machinery fulfills the relevant Essential Health and Safety Requirements (EHSR) 
defined in the Machinery Directive.
• Machinery fulfills the requirements of other possible Directives related to it.
• Conformity with these requirements can be ensured by following the relevant  
harmonized standards.
• The technical file is up-to-date and available. The technical file demonstrates   
that the machine is in accordance with the regulations presented in the               
Machinery Directive.
Note:
Technical file has to be made available within a reasonable time should it be needed 
by eg authorities, and a missing technical file could provide reason to doubt the 
machine’s compliance with the EHSR.
The technical file should cover the design, manufacture and operation of 
the machinery in so far as necessary to demonstrate compliance. 
For more information on the contents of the technical file, see Annex VII of 
the Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC.
• Conformity assessment procedures have been applied. Special requirements for 
machines listed in the Machinery Directive’s Annex IV are met, where appropriate.
• The EC declaration of conformity has been produced and is delivered with           the machine.
Once conformity has been established, a CE marking is affixed.
Machinery that carries CE markings and is accompanied by an EC declaration 
of conformity is presumed to comply with the requirements of the 
Machinery Directive.\n38
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Glossary
CE marking
A mandatory conformity mark on machinery and many other kinds of products 
placed on the single market in the European Economic Area (EEA). By affixing 
CE marking to the product, the manufacturer ensures that the product meets all 
of the essential requirements of the relevant European Directive(s).
CCF, Common Cause Failure
A situation where several subsystems fail due to a single event. All failures are 
caused by the event itself and are not consequences of each other.
DC, Diagnostic Coverage
Diagnostic Coverage (DC) is the effectiveness of fault monitoring of a system or 
subsystem. It is the ratio between the failure rate of detected dangerous failures 
and the failure rate of total dangerous failures.
EHSR, Essential Health and Safety Requirements
Requirements that machinery must meet in order to comply with the European 
Union Machinery Directive and obtain CE marking. These requirements are listed in the Machinery Directive’s Annex I.
EN
Stands for “EuroNorm”. This prefix is used with European standards (or European 
versions of the IEC/ISO standards) from European organizations CEN and CELELEC. 
Harmonized standards also carry the prefix EN.
Harm
Physical injury or damage to health.
Harmonized standard
A European standard that has been prepared under the mandate of the European 
Commission or the EFTA Secretariat with the purpose of supporting the essential 
requirements of a directive and is effectively mandatory under the EU law.
https:/ /ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/european-standards/harmon -
ised-standards/machinery_en
Hazard
Potential source of harm.
IEC, International Electrotechnical Commission
A worldwide organization for standardization that consists of all national 
electrotechnical committees.
www.iec.ch\nGLOSSARY39
ISO, International Organization for Standardization
A worldwide federation of national standards member bodies.
www.iso.org
MTTFd, Mean Time To dangerous Failure
Expectation of the average time for a dangerous failure to occur.PFH
d, Probability of dangerous Failure per Hour
Average probability of dangerous failure taking place during one (1) hour. 
PFHd is the value that is used for determining the SIL or PL value of 
a safety function.
PL, Performance Level
Levels (a, b, c, d, e) for specifying the capability of a safety system to perform 
a safety function under foreseeable conditions.
Risk
A combination of how possible it is for the harm to happen and how severe 
the harm would be.
Safety function
A function designed for adding safety to a machine whose failure can result in 
an immediate increase in risk(s).
SIL, Safety Integrity Level
Levels (1, 2, 3, 4) for specifying the capability of an electrical safety system 
and subsystem to perform a safety function under foreseeable conditions. Only levels 1-3 are used in machinery.
Subsystem
A single component of a safety function that affects the safety level of 
the whole safety function. If any of the subsystems fail, the whole safety 
function fails.\n40
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
—
Index
A
Annex IV: 9, 37
C
CE marking: 5, 8, 11, 20, 37, 38
CEN: 9, 11, 38
CENELEC: 9, 11
D
documenting safety system: 36
E
EHSR: 6, 8, 14, 19, 20, 36, 37, 38
emergency stop: 10, 17
emergency switching off: 17
EN/IEC 61800-5-2: 14, 15, 16, 17
EN/IEC EN 62061: 10, 12, 13
EN ISO 13849-1: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 21, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35
F
functional safety: 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34
functional safety system: 7, 11, 19, 29, 30, 31, 32, 36
H
harmonized standards: 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 19, 23, 37, 38
M
Machinery Directive: 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 19, 20, 21, 23, 36, 37, 38
Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC: 21, 37
P
PL, Performance Level: 8, 11, 13, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 39
proving compliance: 37
R
residual risk: 20, 23, 24, 36
risk analysis: 8, 21, 22
risk assessment: 10, 11, 12, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 36
risk reduction: 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 31, 35\nINDEX41
S
safe brake control (SBC): 16
safely-limited speed (SLS): 16
safe operating stop (SOS): 16
safe speed monitor (SSM): 16
safe stop 1 (SS1-r): 15
safe stop 1 (SS1-t): 15
safe stop 2 (SS2): 15
safety functions: 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 23, 25, 29, 32, 33, 36
safety performance: 19, 20, 25, 26, 31, 33
safety plan: 20, 21
SIL, Safety Integrity Level: 8, 11, 13, 14, 20, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 39
T
type-A standards: 9, 10
type-B standards: 9, 10
type-C standards: 9, 14
U
updating existing machinery: 20
V
validating safety system: 36
verifying safety system: 33\n42
TECHNICAL GUIDE NO. 10 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
Additional information
We reserve the right to make technical 
changes or modify the contents of this 
document without prior notice. With  regard to purchase orders, the agreed 
particulars shall prevail. ABB does not 
accept any responsibility whatsoever for potential errors or possible lack of infor -
mation in this document.
We reserve all rights in this document 
and in the subject matter and illustra -
tions contained therein. Any reproduc -
tion, disclosure to third parties or  utilization of its contents – in whole or  
in parts – is forbidden without prior written consent of ABB.\n43\n—
For more information please contact
your local ABB representative or visit: 
www.abb.com/drives
www.abb.com/drivespartners
3AUA0000048753 REV F EN 23.11.2017© Copyright 2017 ABB. All rights reserved. 
Specifications subject to change without notice.