Safeguarding Equipment and
Protecting Employees from
Amputationswww.osha.gov
Small Business Safety and
Health Management Series
OSHA 3170-02R  2007
\nEmployers are responsible for providing a safe and
healthful workplace for their employees.  OSHA’srole is to assure the safety and health of America’semployees by setting and enforcing standards; pro-viding training, outreach, and education; establish-ing partnerships; and encouraging continual im-provement in workplace safety and health.
This publication is in the public domain and may be
reproduced, fully or partially, without permission.Source credit is requested, but not required.
This information is available to sensory impaired
individuals upon request.  Voice phone:  (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number:  (877) 889-5627.   
Edwin G. Foulke, Jr.
Assistant Secretary of Labor forOccupational Safety and Health
\nSafeguarding Equipment
and Protecting Employees
from Amputations
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
U.S. Department of Labor
OSHA 3170-02R 
2007\n2
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationThis OSHA publication is not a standard or regulation, and it creates no new legal obligations. Thepublication is advisory in nature, informational in content, and is intended to assist employers inproviding a safe and healthful workplace. The Occupational Safety and Health Act requires employers
to comply with hazard-specific safety and health standards. In addition, pursuant to Section 5(a)(1),the General Duty Clause of the Act, employers must provide their employees with a workplace freefrom recognized hazards likely to cause death or serious physical harm. Employers can be cited forviolating the General Duty Clause if there is a recognized hazard and they do not take reasonablesteps to prevent or abate the hazard. However, failure to implement these recommendations is not,in itself, a violation of the General Duty Clause. Citations can only be based on standards, regula-tions, and the General Duty Clause.\nContents
Introduction 5
OSHA Standards 5National Consensus Standards 6
Recognizing Amputation Hazards 7
Hazardous Mechanical Components 7Hazardous Mechanical Motions 7Hazardous Activities 9Hazard Analysis 9
Controlling Amputation Hazards 9
Safeguarding Machinery  9Primary Safeguarding Methods 10Guards 10Safeguarding Devices 13Secondary Safeguarding Methods 16Probe Detection and Safety Edge Devices   16Awareness Devices 17Safeguarding Methods 17Safe Work Procedures 18Complementary Equipment 18Administrative Issues  19Inspection and Maintenance  19Lockout/Tagout  20
Specific Machine Hazards and
Safeguarding Methods 20
Hazards of Mechanical Power Presses 20Safeguarding Mechanical Power Presses 22Other Controls for Mechanical Power Press 
Servicing and Maintenance 23
Training 24Additional Requirements 24Power Press Brakes 25Hazards of Power Press Brakes 25Safeguarding Power Press Brakes 25Other Controls for Power Press Brakes 26 Hazards of Con veyors 26
Safeguarding Con veyors 28
Other Controls for Con veyors 29
Hazards of Printing Presses 30Safeguarding Printing Presses 31Other Controls for Printing Presses 32 Hazards of Roll-Forming and 
Roll-Bending Machines 33Safeguarding Roll-Forming and 
Roll-Bending Machines 33
Other Controls for Roll-Forming and 
Roll-Bending Machines 34
Hazards of Shearing Machines 35Safeguarding Shearing Machines 36Other Controls for Shearing Machines 36Hazards of Food Slicers 37 Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Food Slicers 38
Hazards of Meat Grinders 38Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Meat Grinders 39
Hazards of Meat-Cutting Band Saws 39Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Meat-Cutting Band Saws 40
Hazards of Drill Presses 41Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Drill Presses 42
Hazards of Milling Machines 43Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Milling Machines 44
Hazards of Grinding Machines 45Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Grinding Machines 46
Hazards of Slitters 46Safeguarding and Other Controls for 
Slitters 47
OSHA Assistance 49
References 51
Appendix A.
Amputation Hazards Not Covered in this Guide
53
Appendix B.Amputation Hazards Associated with Other Equipment and Activities
54
Appendix C.OSHA Regional Offices
55
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 3\n4
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationList of Tables
Table 1. Commonly Used Machine Guards 12
Table 2. Types of Safeguarding Devices  13
List of Figures
Figure 1. Rotating Motion  7Figure 2. Reciprocating Motion 7Figure 3. Transversing Motion 7Figure 4. Cutting Action 7Figure 5. Punching Action 8Figure 6. Shearing Action   8Figure 7. Bending Action 8Figure 8. In-Running Nip Points 8Figure 9. Fixed Guard on a Power Press 11Figure 10. Power Press with an Adjustable 
Barrier Guard 11
Figure 11. Self-Adjusting Guard on a 
Radial Saw  11
Figure 12. Interlocked Guard on a Roll 
Make-up Machine  11
Figure 13. Pullback Device on a Power Press  13Figure 14. Restraint Device on a Power Press 16Figure 15. Presence-Sensing Device on a 
Power Press 16
Figure 16. Two-Hand Control 16Figure 17 . Power Press with a Gate 16Figure 18. Power Press with a Plunger Feed 17Figure 19. Shuttle Ejection Mechanism 18Figure 20. Safety Tripod on a Rubber Mill 18Figure 21. Typical Hand-Feeding Tools 19 Figure 22. Properly Guarded Foot Control 19
Figure 23. Part Revolution Mechanical Power 
Press with a Two-Hand Control 21
Figure 24. Hand-Feeding Tools Used in 
Conjunction with Pullbacks on a Power Press 23
Figure 25. Power Press Brake Bending Metal 25Figure 26. Two-Person Power Press Brake 
Operation with Pullbacks 26
Figure 27 . Belt Con veyor 27 
Figure 28. Screw Con veyor 27
Figure 29. Chain Driven Live Roller Con veyor 27
Figure 30. Slat Con veyor 28
Figure 31. Roll-to-Roll Offset Printing Press 31Figure 32. Sheet-Fed Offset Printing Press 31Figure 33. Roll-Forming Machine 33Figure 34. In-Feed Area of a Roll-Forming 
Machine 33
Figure 35. Hydraulic Alligator Shear 35Figure 36. Power Squaring Shear 35Figure 37 . Meat Slicer 37Figure 38. Stainless Steel Meat Grinder 38Figure 39. Stainless Steel Meat-Cutting 
Band Saw 40
Figure 40. Drill Press with a Transparent 
Drill Shield 41
Figure 41. Bed Mill 43Figure 42. Horizontal Surface Grinder 45Figure 43. Paper Slitter 47\nIntroduction
Amputations are among the most severe and dis-
abling workplace injuries that often result in perma-nent disability. They are widespread and involvevarious activities and equipment. (The U.S. Bureauof Labor Statistics 2005 annual survey data indicat-ed that there were 8,450 non-fatal amputation cases– involving days away from work – for all privateindustry. Approximately forty-four percent (44%) ofall workplace amputations occurred in the manu-facturing sector and the rest occurred across theconstruction, agriculture, wholesale and retail trade,and service industries.) These injuries result fromthe use and care of machines such as saws, press-es, conveyors, and bending, rolling or shapingmachines as well as from powered and non-pow-ered hand tools, forklifts, doors, trash compactorsand during materials handling activities. 
Anyone responsible for the operation, servicing,
and maintenance (also known as use and care) ofmachines (which, for purposes of this publicationincludes equipment) — employers, employees,safety professionals, and industrial hygienists—should read this publication. Primary safeguarding,as used in this publication, includes control meth-ods that protect (e.g., prevent employee contactwith hazardous machine areas) employees frommachine hazards through effective machine guard-ing techniques. In addition, a hazardous energycontrol (lockout/tagout) program needs to comple-ment machine safeguarding methods in order toprotect employees during potentially hazardousservicing and maintenance work activities.  
This guide can help you, the small business
employer, identify and manage common amputa-tion hazards associated with the operation and careof machines. The first two sections of the document,Recognizing Amputation Hazards andControlling
Amputation Hazards , look at sources of amputa-
tions and how to safeguard machinery and controlemployee exposure to hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) during machine servicing and maintenanceactivities. The section on Specific Machinery
Hazards and Safeguarding Methods identifies the
hazards and various control methods for machineryassociated with workplace amputations, such as:mechanical power presses, press brakes, convey-ors, printing presses, roll-forming and roll-bendingmachines, shears, food slicers, meat grinders, meat-cutting band saws, drill presses, milling machines,grinding machines, and slitting machines.  
The information in this booklet does not specif-
ically address amputation hazards on all types ofmachinery in general industry, construction, mar-
itime and agricultural operations; however, many
of the described safeguarding techniques may beused to prevent other amputation injuries.  Ad-ditionally, while this manual concentrates attentionon concepts and techniques for safeguardingmechanical motion, machines obviously present avariety of other types of energy hazards that cannotbe ignored. For example, pressure system failurecould cause fires and explosions. Machine electri-cal sources also pose electrical hazards that areaddressed by other OSHA standards, such as theelectrical standards contained in Subpart S. Fulldiscussion of these matters is beyond the scope ofthis publication. For compliance assistance purpos-es, references and the appendices are provided onapplicable OSHA standards, additional informationsources, and ways you may obtain OSHA assistance.
OSHA Standards
Although this guide recommends ways to safeguardand lockout/tagout energy sources associated withmachinery hazards, there are legal requirements inOSHA standards that you need to know about andcomply with. The following OSHA standards are afew of the regulations that protect employees fromamputation hazards. 
Machinery and Machine Guarding:
29 CFR Part 1910, Subpart O
•  1910.211 – Definitions
•  1910.212 – General requirements for all
machines
•  1910.213 – Woodworking machinery require-
ments
•  1910.215 – Abrasive wheel machinery
•  1910.216 – Mills and calenders in the rubber
and plastics industries
•  1910.217 – Mechanical power presses
•  1910.218 – Forging machines
•  1910.219 – Mechanical power-transmission
apparatus
Control of Hazardous Energy (Lockout/T agout):
29 CFR 1910.147
Hand and Power T ools:
29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart I
•  1926.300 – General requirements
•  1926.303 – Abrasive wheels and tools
•  1926.307 – Mechanical power-transmission
apparatus
Conveyors:
29 CFR 1926.555
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 5\nConcrete and Masonry Construction 
29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart Q
•  1926.702 – Requirements for equipment and
tools
Consult these standards directly to ensure full
compliance with the provisions as this publicationis not a substitute for the standards. States withOSHA-approved plans have at least equivalentstandards. For detailed information about machineguarding and lockout/tagout, see the followingresources:•  Machine Guarding Safety and Health Topics
Page (http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/machineguarding/index.html)
•    Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.osha.gov/
SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and Techniques
of Machine Safeguarding (http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguarding/toc.html)
•  OSHA Directive STD 01-05-019 [STD 1-7.3],
Control of Hazardous Energy (Lockout/Tagout)—Inspection Procedures and Interpretive Guidance
•  Control of Hazardous Energy (Lockout/Tagout)
Safety and Health Topics Page (http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/controlhazardousenergy/index.html)
•  OSHA’s Lockout Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ lototraining/index.htm)
•  OSHA Publication 3120, Control of Hazardous
Energy (Lockout/Tagout)
OSHA standards, directives, publications, 
and other resources are available online atwww.osha.gov.
National Consensus Standards
OSHA recognizes the valuable contributions ofnational consensus standards and these voluntarystandards may be used as guidance and recognitionof industry accepted practices. For example, theAmerican National Standards Institute (ANSI) pub-lishes numerous voluntary national consensus stan-dards on the safe care and use of specific machinery.These consensus standards provide you with usefulguidance on how to protect your em-ployees frommachine amputation hazards and the controlmeth ods described may assist you in complying
with OSHA performance-based standards.
Furthermore, OSHA encourages employers to
abide by the more current industry consensus stan-dards since those standards are more likely to beabreast of the state of the art than an applicableOSHA standard may be. However, when a consen-sus standard addresses safety considerations, OSHAmay determine that the safety practices described
by that consensus standard are less protective thanthe requirement(s) set forth by the pertinent OSHAregulations. OSHA enforcement policy regardingthe use of consensus standards is that a violationof an OSHA standard may be deemed de minimis
in nature if the employer complies with a consen-sus standard (that is not incorporated by reference)rather than the OSHA standard in effect and if theemployer’s action clearly provides equal or greateremployee protection. (Such de minimis violations
require no corrective action and result in no penalty.) 
For example, the OSHA point-of-operation
guarding provisions, contained in paragraph1910.212(a)(3), require the guarding device to… be
in conformance with any appropriate standardsthereof, or in the absence of applicable specificstandards, shall be so designed and constructed asto prevent the operator from having any part of hisbody in the danger zone during the operating cycle.The terms applicable standards or appropriate stan-dards, as used in the context of 29 CFR 1910.212,are references to those private consensus stan-dards that were adopted (source standards) orincorporated by reference in the OSHA standards.  
In some instances, a specific national consensus
standard (that is not incorporated by reference or asource standard), such as an ANSI standard for aparticular machine, may be used for guidance pur-poses to assist employers in preventing an opera-tor from having any body part in the machine dan-ger zone during the operating cycle. Also, OSHAmay, in appropriate cases, use these consensusstandards as evidence that machine hazards are rec-ognized and that there are feasible means of cor-recting the hazard. On the other hand, some nation-al consensus standards may sanction practices thatprovide less employee protection than that providedby compliance with the relevant OSHA provisions.In these cases, compliance with the specific consen-sus standard provision would not constitute compli-ance with the relevant OSHA requirement.
Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the
Secretary of Labor has designated certain non-farm jobs as particularly hazardous for employ-ees younger than 18. Generally, these employ-ees are prohibited from operating:
•  Band saws  •  Circular saws  •  Guillotine
shears  •  Punching and shearing machines
•  Meatpacking or meat-processing machines•  Certain power-driven machines: Paper products
machines, Woodworking machines, Metalforming machines, and Meat slicers.
6
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration\nRecognizing Amputation
Hazards
To prevent employee amputations, you and your
employees must first be able to recognize the con-tributing factors, such as the hazardous energy associ-ated with your machinery and the specific employeeactivities performed with the mechanical operation.Understanding the mechanical components ofmachinery, the hazardous mechanical motion thatoccurs at or near these components and specificemployee activities performed in conjunction withmachinery operation will help employees avoid injury.
Hazardous Mechanical Components 
Three types of mechanical components presentamputation hazards:
Point of Operation is the area of the machine
where the machine performs work – i.e., mechani-cal actions that occur at the point of operation,such as cutting, shaping, boring, and forming.
Power-T ransmission Apparatus is all components
of the mechanical system that transmit energy,such as flywheels, pulleys, belts, chains, couplings,connecting rods, spindles, cams, and gears.
Other Moving Parts are the parts of the machine
that move while the machine is operating, suchas reciprocating, rotating, and transverse mov-ing parts as well as lead mechanisms and auxil-iary parts of the machine.
Hazardous Mechanical Motions
A wide variety of mechanical motion is potentiallyhazardous.  Here are the basic types of hazardousmechanical motions:
Rotating Motion (Figure 1 ) is circular motion such
as action generated by rotating collars, couplings,cams, clutches, flywheels, shaft ends, and spin-dles that may grip clothing or otherwise force abody part into a dangerous location. Even smoothsurfaced rotating machine parts can be hazardous.Projections such as screws or burrs on the rotat-
ing part increase the hazard potential.
Figure 1 Rotating MotionReciprocating Motion (Figure 2 ) is back-and-forth
or up-and-down motion that may strike or entrapan employee between a moving part and a fixedobject.
Figure 2 Reciprocating Motion
T ransversing Motion (Figure 3 ) is motion in a
straight, continuous line that may strike or catchan employee in a pinch or shear point created bythe moving part and a fixed object. 
Figure 3 T ransversing Motion
Cutting Action (Figure 4 ) is the action that cuts
material and the associated machine motion maybe rotating, reciprocating, or transverse.
Figure 4 Cutting Action
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 7
T able
Bed (stationary)
\nPunching Action (Figure 5 ) begins when power
causes the machine to hit a slide (ram) to stampor blank metal or other material. The hazardoccurs at the point of operation where theemployee typically inserts, holds, or withdrawsthe stock by hand.
Figure 5 Punching Action
Shearing Action (Figure 6 ) involves applying
power to a slide or knife in order to trim or shearmetal or other materials. The hazard occurs at thepoint of operation where the employee typicallyinserts, holds, or withdraws the stock by hand. 
Figure 6 Shearing ActionBending Action (Figure 7 ) is power applied to a
slide to draw or stamp metal or other materials ina bending motion. The hazard occurs at the pointof operation where the employee typically inserts,holds, or withdraws the stock by hand.
Figure 7 Bending Action
In-Running Nip Points (Figure 8 ), also known as
“pinch points,” develop when two parts movetogether and at least one moves in rotary or circu-lar motion. In-running nip points occur whenevermachine parts move toward each other or whenone part moves past a stationary object. Typicalnip points include gears, rollers, belt drives, andpulleys.  
Figure 8 In-Running Nip Points
8
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
Blade
StockPunch
Stock
Die
Nip Point
Nip
Point
T ypical Nip PointNip PointNip Point
Nip 
Point\nHazardous Activities 
Employees operating and caring for machinery
perform various activities that present potentialamputation hazards.  
Machine set-up/threading/preparation,*
Machine inspection,*Normal production operations,Clearing jams,*Machine adjustments,*Cleaning of machine,*Lubricating of machine parts,* andScheduled and unscheduled maintenance.*
* These activities are servicing and/or mainte-
nance activities.
Hazard Analysis
You can help prevent workplace amputations by
looking at your workplace operations and identify-ing the hazards associated with the use and care ofthe machine. A hazard analysis is a technique thatfocuses on the relationship between the employee,the task, the tools, and the environment. Whenevaluating work activities for potential amputationhazards, you need to consider the entire machineoperation production process, the machine modesof operation, individual activities associated withthe operation, servicing and maintenance of themachine, and the potential for injury to employees.  
The results from the analysis may then be used
as a basis to design machine safeguarding and anoverall energy control (lockout/tagout) program.This is likely to result in fewer employee amputa-tions; safer, more effective work methods; reducedworkers’ compensation costs; and increased em-ployee productivity and morale.Controlling Amputation
Hazards
Safeguarding is essential for protecting employees
from needless and preventable injury. A good ruleto remember is: 
Any machine part, function, or process that may
cause injury must be safeguarded.
In this booklet, the term primary safeguarding
methods refers to machine guarding techniques
that are intended to prevent or greatly reduce thechance that an employee will have an amputationinjury. Refer to the OSHA general industry (e.g.,
Subpart O) and construction (e.g., Subparts I andN) standards for specific guarding requirements.Many of these standards address preventive meth-ods (such as using barrier guards or two-hand trip-
ping devices) as primary control measures; while
other OSHA standards allow guarding techniques(such as a self-adjustable table saw guard) thatreduce the likelihood of injury. Other less protectivesafeguarding methods (such as safe work methods)that do not satisfactorily protect employees fromthe machine hazard areas are considered second-ary control methods.  
Machine safeguarding must be supplemented
by an effective energy control (lockout/tagout)program that ensures that employees are protectedfrom hazardous energy sources during machineservicing and maintenance work activities.Lockout/tagout plays an essential role in the pre-vention and control of workplace amputations. Interms of controlling amputation hazards, employ-ees are protected from hazardous machine workactivities either by: 1) effective machine safeguard-ing, or 2) lockout/tagout where safeguards are ren-dered ineffective or do not protect employees fromhazardous energy during servicing and mainte-nance operations.  
Additionally, there are some servicing activities,
such as lubricating, cleaning, releasing jams andmaking machine adjustments that are minor innature and are performed during normal produc-tion oper ations. It is not necessary to lockout/
tagout a m achine if the activity is routine, repetitive
and integral to the production operation providedthat you use an alternative control method that
affords effective protection from the machine’shazardous energy sources.
Safeguarding Machinery
The employer is responsible for safeguardingmachines and should consider this need when pur-chasing machinery. Almost all new machinery is
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 9\navailable with safeguards installed by the manufac-
turer, but used equipment may not be.  
If machinery has no safeguards, you may be
able to purchase safeguards from the originalmachine manufacturer or from an after-marketmanufacturer. You can also build and install thesafeguards in-house.  Safeguarding equipmentshould be designed and installed only by technical-ly qualified professionals.  If possible, the originalequipment manufacturer should review the safe-guard design to ensure that it will protect employ-ees without interfering with the operation of themachine or creating additional hazards.  
Regardless of the source of safeguards, the
guards and devices used need to be compatiblewith a machine’s operation and designed to ensuresafe operator use. The type of operation, size, andshape of stock, method of feeding, physical layoutof the work area, and production requirements allaffect the selection of safeguards. Also, safeguardsshould be designed with the machine operator inmind as a guarding method that interferes with theoperation of the machine may cause employees tooverride them. To ensure effective and safe operatoruse, guards and devices should suit the operation. 
The Performance Criteria for Safeguarding
[ANSI B11.19-2003] national consensus standardprovides valuable guidance as the standardaddresses the design, construction, installation,operation and maintenance of the safeguardingused to protect employees from machine hazards.The following safeguarding method descriptionsare, in part, structured like and, in many ways aresimilar to this national consensus standard. 
The Performance Criteria for Safeguarding [ANSI
B11.19-2003] defines safeguarding as the protec-
tion of personnel from hazards by the use ofguards, safeguarding devices awareness devices,safeguarding methods, or safe work procedures.The following ANSI B11.19 definitions describethe various types of safeguarding:
Guard: A barrier that prevents exposure to an
identified hazard.
Safeguarding device: A device that detects or
prevents inadvertent access to a hazard.
NOTE: The 1990 ANSI B11.19 term Safeguarding
device was modified to Safeguarding (Protective)
Device in the revised 2003 ANSI standard and the
new term includes a detection component. De-vices that detect, but do not prevent employeeexposure to machine hazards are not considered
by OSHA to be primary safeguarding methods.
Awareness device: A barrier, signal or sign that
warns individuals of an impending, approachingor present hazard.
Safeguarding method: Safeguarding implement-
ed to protect individuals from hazards by thephysical arrangement of distance, holding, open-ings, or positioning of the machine or machineproduction system to ensure that the operatorcannot reach the hazard.
Safe work procedures: Formal written instruc-
tions developed by the user which describe howa task is to be performed.
Primary Safeguarding Methods
Two primary methods are used to safeguardmachines: guards and some types of safeguardingdevices. Guards provide physical barriers that pre-vent access to danger areas. Safeguarding deviceseither prevent or detect operator contact with thepoint of operation or stop potentially hazardousmachine motion if any part of an individual’s bodyis within the hazardous portion of the machine.Both types of safeguards need to be properlydesigned, constructed, installed, used and main-tained in good operating condition to ensureemployee protection.
Criteria for Machine Safeguarding
•  Prevents employee contact with the hazard
area during machine operation.
•  Avoids creating additional hazards.•  Is secure, tamper-resistant, and durable.•  Avoids interfering with normal operation of
the machine.
•  Allows for safe lubrication and maintenance.
Guards
Guards usually are preferable to other controlmethods because they are physical barriers thatenclose dangerous machine parts and preventemployee contact with them. To be effective,guards must be strong and fastened by any securemethod that prevents the guard from being inad-vertently dislodged or removed.  Guards typicallyare designed with screws, bolts and lock fastenersand usually a tool is necessary to unfasten and
10
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration\nremove them.  Generally, guards are designed not
to obstruct the operator’s view or to preventemployees from doing a job.
In some cases, guarding may be used as an
alternative to lockout/tagout because employeescan safely service or maintain machines with aguard in place. For example, polycarbonate andwire-mesh guards provide greater visibility and canbe used to allow maintenance employees to safelyobserve system components. In other instances,employees may safely access machine areas, with-out locking or tagging out, to perform maintenancework (such as machine cleaning or oiling tasks)because the hazardous machine componentsremain effectively guarded.   
Guards must not create additional hazards such
as pinch points or shear points between guardsand other machine parts. Guard openings shouldbe small enough to prevent employees fromaccessing danger areas. (See Table 1 and Figures
9 through 12 for commonly used machine guards.)
Figure 9 Fixed Guard on a Power Press
Figure 10 Power Press with an Adjustable Barrier Guard
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 11Figure 11 Self-Adjusting Guard on a Radial Saw
Figure 12 Interlocked Guard on a Roll Make-up Machine
T ransparent InsertEntering
Stock
Exiting
Stock
Bar
GuardHandle
Anti-
KickbackDevice
Blade
Switch
Guard\n12
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationT ype
Fixed
Adjustable
Self-
Adjusting
Interlocking
BarrierGuardsMethod of
Safeguarding
Barrier that allows for 
stock feeding but does notpermit operator to reachthe danger area.
Barrier that adjusts for 
a variety of productionoperations.
Barrier that moves 
according to the size of thestock entering point ofoperation. Guard is in placewhen machine is at restand pushes away whenstock enters the point ofoperation.
Shuts off or disengages
power and preventsmachine start-up whenguard is open.  Shouldallow for inching ofmachine.  Advantages
•  Can be constructed to suit
many applications.
•  Permanently encloses 
the point of operation orhazard area.
•  Provides protection
against machine repeat.
•  Allows simple, in-plant
construction, with mini-mal maintenance.
•  Can be constructed to
suit many applications.
•  Can be adjusted to admit
varying stock sizes.
•  Off-the-shelf guards are
often commercially avail-able.
•  Allows access for some
minor servicing work, inaccordance with the lock-out/tagout exception,without time-consumingremoval of fixed guards.Limitations
•  Sometimes not practical
for changing productionruns involving differentsize stock or feedingmethods.
•  Machine adjustment and
repair often require guardremoval.
•  Other means of protecting
maintenance personneloften required(lockout/tagout).
•  May require frequent
maintenance or adjustment.
•  Operator may make 
guard ineffective.
•  Does not provide 
maximum protection.
•  May require frequent
maintenance and adjustment.
•  May require periodic
maintenance or adjust-ment.
•  Movable sections cannot
be used for manual feed-ing.
•  Some designs may be
easy to defeat.
•  Interlock control circuitry
may not be used for allmaintenance and servic-ing work.T able 1. Commonly Used Machine Guards
T ypes of Machine Guards\nSafeguarding Devices 
Safeguarding devices are controls or attachments
that, when properly designed, applied and used,usually prevent inadvertent access by employees tohazardous machine areas by:    
•  Preventing hazardous machine component oper-
ation if your hand or body part is inadvertentlyplaced in the danger area; 
•  Restraining or withdrawing your hands from the
danger area during machine operation; 
•  Requiring the use of both of your hands on
machine controls (or the use of one hand if thecontrol is mounted at a safe distance from thedanger area) that are mounted at a predeter-mined safety distance; or 
•  Providing a barrier which is synchronized with
the operating cycle in order to prevent entry tothe danger area during the hazardous part of thecycle.   
These types of engineering controls, which
either prevent the start of or stop hazardousmotion, may be used in place of guards or assupplemental control measures when guards alonedo not adequately enclose the hazard. In order forthese safeguarding devices to accomplish thisrequirement, they must be properly designed andinstalled at a predetermined safe distance from themachine’s danger area. Other safeguarding devices(probe detection and safety edge devices) thatmerely detect, instead of prevent, inadvertentaccess to a hazard are not considered primary safe-
guards.  (See Table 2 and Figures 13 through 17 for
the types of safeguarding devices.)
Figure 13 Pullback Device on a Power Press
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 13
Pullback
Mechanism
Pullback
Straps
Wristbands
T ype
Pullback
DevicesMethod of
Safeguarding
Cords connected to 
operator’s wrists and linked mechanically to the machine automaticallywithdraw the hands fromthe point of operation during the machine cycle.Advantages
•  Allows the hands to enter
the point of operation forfeeding and removal.
•  Provides protection even
in the event of mechani-cal repeat.Limitations
•  Close supervision ensures
proper use and adjust-ment.  Must be inspectedprior to each operatorchange or machine set-up.
•  Limits operator’s move-
ment and  may obstructtheir work space.
•  Operator may easily make
device ineffective by notadjusting the device properly.T able 2. T ypes of Safeguarding Devices
T ypes of Machine Guards\n14
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationT ype
Restraint
Devices
Presence-
SensingDevices
Presence-
SensingMatsMethod of
Safeguarding
Wrists are connected by
cords and secured to afixed anchor point whichlimit operator’s hands fromreaching the point of oper-ation at any time.
Interlock into the machine’s
control system to stopoperation when the sens-ing field (photoelectric,radio frequency, or electro-magnetic) is disturbed.
Interlock into machine’s
control system to stopoperation when a predeter-mined weight is applied tothe mat. A manual resetswitch must be located out-side the protected zone.Advantages
•  Simple, few moving 
parts; requires little maintenance.
•  Operator cannot reach
into the danger area.
•  Little risk of mechanical
failure; provides protec-tion even in the event ofmechanical repeat.
•  Adjusts to fit different
stock sizes.
•  Allows access to load 
and unload the machine.
•  Allows access to the
guarded area for main- tenance and set-up activities.
•  Full visibility and access
to the work area.
•  Install as a perimeter
guard or over an entirearea.
•  Configure for many 
applications.Limitations
•  Close supervision re-
quired to ensure properuse and adjustment.Must be inspected priorto each operator changeor machine set-up.
•  Operator must use hand
tools to enter the point ofoperation.
•  Limits the movement of
the operator; mayobstruct work spacearound operator.
•  Operator may easily make
device ineffective by dis-connecting the device. 
•  Restricted to machines
that stop operating cyclebefore operator can reachinto danger area (e.g.,machines with partial revolution clutches orhydraulic machines).
•  Must be carefully main-
tained and adjusted.
•  Does not protect 
operator in the event of a mechanical failure.
•  Operator may make
device ineffective.
•  Restricted to machines
that stop operating cyclebefore operator can reachinto danger area (e.g.,machines with part-revolution clutches orhydraulic machines).
•  Some chemicals can
degrade the mats.
•  Does not protect 
operator during mechanical failures.T able 2. T ypes of Safeguarding Devices (continued)
T ypes of Machine Guards\nSAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 15T ype
Two-
HandControl
Two-
Hand Trip
Type “A”
Gate(move-able barrier)
Type “B”
Gate(move-able barrier)Method of
Safeguarding
Requires concurrent and
continued use of bothhands, preventing themfrom entering the dangerarea.
Requires concurrent use of
both hands, prevents themfrom being in danger areawhen machine cycle starts.
Applicable to mechanical
power presses. Providesbarrier between dangerarea and operator (or otheremployees) until comple-tion of  machine cycle.
Applicable to mechanical
power presses and pressbrakes.  Provides a barrierbetween danger area andoperator (or other employ-ees) during the down-stroke.Advantages
•  Operator’s hands are at 
a  predetermined safetydistance.
•  Operator’s hands are free
to pick up new parts aftercompletion of first part ofcycle.
•  Operator’s hands are at 
a predetermined safetydistance.
•  Can be adapted to 
multiple operations.
•  No obstruction to hand
feeding.
•  Prevents operator from
reaching into danger areaduring machine cycle.
•  Provides protection from
machine repeat.
•  May increase production
by allowing the operatorto remove and feed thepress on the upstroke.Limitations
•  Requires a partial cycle
machine with a brake and anti-repeat feature.
•  Operator may make
devices without anti-tiedown ineffective.
•  Protects the operator 
only.
•  Operator may make
devices without anti-tiedown ineffective.
•  Protects the operator
only.
•  Sometimes impractical
because distance require-ments may reduce pro-duction below acceptablelevel.
•  May require adjustment
with tooling changes.
•  Requires anti-repeat 
feature.
•  May require frequent
inspection and regularmaintenance.
•  May interfere with opera-
tor’s ability to see work.
•  Can only be used on
machines with a part-revolution clutch orhydraulic machines.
•  May require frequent
inspection and regularmaintenance.
•  May interfere with the
operator’s ability to seework.T able 2. T ypes of Safeguarding Devices (continued)
T ypes of Machine Guards\nFigure 17 Power Press with a Gate
Secondary Safeguarding Methods  
Other safeguarding methods, such as those described
in the Performance Criteria for Safeguarding (ANSI
B11.19-2003), may also provide employees withsome protection from machine hazards. Detectionsafeguarding devices, awareness devices, safe-guarding methods and safe work procedures aredescribed in this section. These methods provide alesser degree of employee protection than the pri-mary safeguarding methods and they are consid-ered secondary control measures as they do notprevent employees from placing or having any partof their bodies in the hazardous machine areas.   
Secondary safeguarding methods are accept-
able only when guards or safeguarding devices(that prevent you from being exposed to machinehazards) cannot be installed due to reasons ofinfeasibility. Where it is feasible to use primarysafeguarding methods, secondary safeguardingmethods may supplement these primary controlmeasures; however, these secondary safeguardingmethods must not be used in place of primary safe-guarding methods.
Probe Detection and Safety Edge Devices
A probe detection device (sometimes referred to asa ring guard ) detects the presence or absence of a
person’s hand or finger by encircling all or part ofthe machine hazard area. The ring guard makes
you aware of your hand’s entry into a hazardousarea and usually stops or prevents a hazardousmachine cycle or stroke, thereby reducing the likeli-hood of injuring yourself in the point of operation.These types of detection devices are commonlyused on spot welders, riveters, staplers and stack-Figure 14 Restraint Device on a Power Press
Figure 15 Presence-Sensing Device on a Power Press
Figure 16 T wo-Hand Control
16
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
Emergency Stop
Press 
BedControl
Box
Light 
Curtain
Guarded
Foot Control
Key Selector Capable
of Being Supervised
Gate
Light Indicator
Emergency Stop T op Stop\nSafe Distance Safeguarding
Safeguarding by safe distance (by location) mayinvolve an operator holding and supporting a work-piece with both hands at a predetermined mini-mum safe distance or, if both hands cannot be usedto hold the work-piece at a distance so that theoperator cannot reach the hazard with the freehand. For example, the feeding process itself cancreate a dis tance safeguard if the operators main-
tain a safe distance between their hands and thepoint of operation. Additionally, where materialposition gauges are used, they need to be of suffi-
cient height and size to prevent slipping of thematerial past the gauges.
Another example of a safe distance safeguard-
ing method is the use of gravity feed methods thatreduce or eliminate employee exposure to machinehazards as the part slides down a chute into thepoint of operation. Automatic and semiautomaticfeeding and ejection methods can also protect theemployee by minimizing or eliminating employeeexposure with potentially hazardous machinerycomponents. An employee places the part in amagazine which is then fed into the point of opera-tion. Automatic and semiautomatic ejection methodsinclude pneumatic (jet of air), magnetic, mechanical(such as an arm), or vacuum. Figures 18 and 19
illustrate different types of automatic feeding andejecting methods.
Figure 18 Power Press with a Plunger Feed
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 17ers because primary safeguarding methods are not
possible. However, probe detection devices do notprevent inadvertent access to the point-of-operationdanger area; rather, they serve as a warning mech-anism and may prevent the initiation of or stop themachine cycle if an employee’s hand or finger(s) istoo close to the hazard area.   
A safety edge device (sometimes called a bump
switch ) is another type of safeguard that detects the
presence of an employee when they are in contactwith the device’s sensing edge. A safety edgedevice protects employees by initiating a stop com-mand when the sensing surface detects the pres-ence of a person; however, they do not usually,when used by themselves, prevent inadvertentaccess to machine danger areas. Therefore, addi-tional guarding or safeguarding devices must beprovided to prevent employee exposure to amachine hazard.
Awareness Devices  
Awareness devices warn employees of an impend-ing, approaching or present hazard. The first typeis an awareness barrier which allows access tomachine danger areas, but it is designed to contactthe employee, creating an awareness that he or sheis close to the danger point. Awareness signals,through the use of recognizable audible or visualsignals, are other devices that alert employees toan approaching or present hazard. Lastly, aware-ness signs are used to notify employees of thenature of the hazard and to provide instructionsand training information. OSHA standard 1910.145provides design, application, and use specificationsfor accident prevention (danger, caution, safetyinstruction) signs and (danger, caution, warning)tags.
Safeguarding Methods  
Safeguarding methods protect employees fromhazards by the physical arrangement of distance,holding, openings or the positioning of themachine components to ensure that the operatorcannot reach the hazard. Some safeguarding workmethods include safe distance safeguarding, safeholding safeguarding and safe opening safeguard-ing. Requirements for these secondary controlmeasures may be found in ANSI B11.19-2003.Proper training and supervision are essential toensure that these secondary safeguarding methodsare being used properly. Safeguarding work meth-ods may require the use of awareness devices,including the use of accident prevention signs wherethere is a need for warning or safety instruction.  
Plunger Plunger
HandlePoint of
OperationGuard
Nest\nFigure 19 Shuttle Ejection Mechanism
Safe Holding Safeguarding ( Safe Work-Piece
Safeguarding)Operator’s hands are maintained away from thehazardous portion of the machine cycle by requir-ing that both hands are used to hold or support thework-piece, or by requiring that one hand holds thework-piece while the other hand operates themachine. For instance, if the stock is several feet longand only one end of the stock is being worked on,the operator may be able to hold the opposite endwhile performing the work. The operator’s body
parts are out of the machine hazard area dur ing the
hazardous portion of the machine cycle. However,
this work method only protects the operator.
Safe Opening Safeguarding 
This method limits access to the machine haz-ardous areas by the size of the opening or by clos-ing off the danger zone access when the work-pieceis in place in the machine.  Operators are preventedfrom reaching the hazard area during the machineoperation; however, employee access to the dangerarea is not adequately guarded when the work-piece is not in place. 
Safe Work Procedures  
Safe work procedures are formal, written instruc-tions which describe how a task is to be performed.These procedures should incorporate appropriatesafe work practices, such as prohibiting employeesfrom wearing loose clothing or jewelry and requir-ing the securing of long hair with nets or caps.Clothing, jewelry, long hair, and even gloves can getentangled in moving machine parts.
Complementary Equipment   
Complementary equipment is used in conjunctionwith selected safeguarding techniques and it is, byitself, not a safeguarding method. Some commoncomplementary equipment used to augmentmachine safeguarding include:
18
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationEmergency Stop Devices 
Emergency stop devices are designed to be usedin reaction to an incident or hazardous situationand, as such, are not considered machine safe-guarding. These devices, such as buttons, rope-pulls, cable-pulls, or pressure-sensitive body bars,neither detect nor prevent employee exposure tomachine hazards; rather they initiate an action tostop hazardous motion when an employee recog-nizes a hazard and activates them. (See Figure 20 .)
Figure 20 Safety T ripod on a Rubber Mill
Work-Holding Equipment 
Work-holding equipment is not used to feed or re-move the work-piece, but rather to hold it in place
during the hazardous portion of the machine cycle.Clamps, jigs, fixtures and back gauges are exam-ples of work-holding equipment. This equipmentmay be used to reduce or eliminate the need for anemployee to place their hands in the hazard area.
Feeding and Ejection Systems 
A feeding and ejection system (e.g., a gravity fedchute; semi-automatic and automatic feeding andejection equipment), by itself, does not constitutesecondary safeguarding. However, the use of prop-erly designed feed and ejection mechanisms canprotect employees by minimizing or eliminating theneed for them to be in a hazard area during thehazardous motion of the machine. 
Hand-Feeding T ools 
Operators can use tools to feed and remove materi-al into and from machines so as to keep theirhands away from the point of operation. However,this must be done only in conjunction with theguards and safeguarding devices described previ-ously. Hand tools are not point-of-operation guard-
Slide in
DownPositionSlide in
UpPositionPoint of
Operation
Guard
Completed
Part
ChutePan
Shuttle
Feeding
T oolStock
T ripod\ning or safeguarding devices and they need to be
designed to allow employees’ hands to remain out-side of the machine danger area. Using hand toolsrequires close supervision to ensure that the opera-tor does not bypass their use to increase produc-tion. It is recommended that these tools be storednear the operation to promote their use. 
To prevent injury and repetitive trauma disor-
ders, hand-feeding tools should be shatterproofand ergonomically designed for the specific taskbeing performed. ( Figure 21 shows typical hand-
feeding tools.)
Figure 21  T ypical Hand-Feeding T ools
Foot Controls  
Foot controls that are not securely fixed at a safedistance do not constitute machine safeguardingbecause they do not keep the operator’s hands outof the danger area.  If you use foot-actuated con-trols that are not single-control safeguardingdevices, they will need to be used with some typeof guard or other safeguarding device. 
Improperly used foot-actuated controls may
increase productivity, but the freedom of handmovement increases the risk of a point-of-operationinjury or amputation. Foot controls must be guard-ed to prevent accidental activation by anotheremployee or by falling material. Do not ride thefoot pedal. Ensure that the machine control circuitis properly designed to prevent continuous cycling.(See Figure 22 for an example of a properly guard-
ed foot control.)
Figure 22  
Properly Guarded Foot Control
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 19Administrative Issues   
As an employer, you need to consider housekeep-
ing practices, employee apparel, and employeetraining.  Implement good housekeeping practicesto promote safe working conditions around ma-chinery by doing the following:
•  Remove slip, trip, and fall hazards from the
areas surrounding machines;
•  Use drip pans when oiling equipment;   •  Remove waste stock as it is generated;•  Make the work area large enough for machine
operation and maintenance; and  
•  Place machines away from high traffic areas to
reduce employee distraction.
Employees should not wear loose-fitting cloth-
ing, jewelry, or other items that could becomeentangled in machinery, and long hair should beworn under a cap or otherwise contained to pre-vent entanglement in moving machinery.
Adequate instruction in the safe use and care of
machines and supervised on-the-job training areessential in preventing amputation injuries.  Onlytrained employees should operate machinery.
T rain Employees in the Following:
•  All hazards in the work area, including
machine-specific hazards;
•  Machine operating procedures, lockout/tagout
procedures and safe work practices;
•  The purpose and proper use of machine safe-
guards; and
•  All procedures for responding to safeguarding
problems such as immediately reporting un-safe conditions such as missing or damagedguards and violations of safe operating prac-tices to supervisors.  
In addition to employee instruction and training,
employers need to provide adequate supervisionto reinforce safe practices. Take disciplinary ac-tion to enforce safe work practices and workingconditions.
Inspection and Maintenance    
Good inspection, maintenance and repair proce-dures contribute significantly to the safety of themaintenance crew as well as to the operators. Toensure the integrity of the machinery and machinesafeguards, a proactive, versus a break-down main-
\nSpecific Machine Hazards
and Safeguarding Methods
As discussed earlier, 8,450 known non-fatal ampu-
tation cases (involving days away from work)occurred in 2005 for all of private industry. Themost prevalent injury source was, by far, machin-ery, which accounted for approximately 60% (5,080instances) of the amputation cases.
1The machinery
listed here cause amputation injuries, and appropri-ate safeguarding and hazardous energy control(lockout/tagout) methods are addressed in this sec-tion. Employers need to consult the OSHA standardfor specific machinery to ensure compliance withall requirements. For other types of hazardoussources of injury, see Appendix B. 
Machinery Associated with Amputations
1. Mechanical Power Presses
2. Power Press Brakes3. Powered and Non-Powered Conveyors4. Printing Presses5. Roll-Forming and Roll-Bending Machines6. Shearing Machines7. Food Slicers8. Meat Grinders9. Meat-Cutting Band Saws
10. Drill Presses11. Milling Machines12. Grinding Machines13. Slitters
Hazards of Mechanical Power Presses    
Although there are three major types of powerpresses—mechanical, hydraulic, and pneumatic—the machinery that accounts for a large number ofworkplace amputations are mechanical powerpresses.  
In mechanical power presses, tools or dies are
mounted on a slide, or ram, which operates in acontrolled, reciprocating motion toward and awayfrom the stationary bed or anvil containing thelower die.  When the upper and lower dies presstogether – to punch, shear or form – the work-piece, the desired piece is produced. Once thedownstroke is completed, the re-formed work-piece
20
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administrationtenance program needs to be established based
upon the:
•  Manufacturer’s recommendations;
•  Good engineering practice; and•  Any applicable OSHA provisions (such as the
mechanical power press inspection and mainte-nance requirements, contained in 1910.217(e)).
Lockout/Tagout   
OSHA’s lockout/tagout (LOTO) standard, 29 CFR1910.147, establishes minimum performance re-quirements for controlling hazardous energy and itis intended to complement and augment machinesafeguarding practices. The lockout/tagout standardapplies only if employees are exposed to hazard-ous energy during servicing/maintenance activities.An employer may avoid the requirements of theLOTO standard if the safeguarding method elimi-
nates your employees’ exposure to the machine
danger area during the servicing or maintenancework by using Machinery and Machine Guardingmethods in accordance with the requirements con-tained in 29 CFR 1910, Subpart O.  
Additionally, because some minor servicing may
have to be performed during normal productionoperations, an employer may be exempt fromLOTO in some instances. Minor tool changes andadjustments and other minor servicing operations,which take place during normal production opera-tions, are not covered by lockout/tagout if they areroutine, repetitive and integral to the use of themachine for production and if work is performedusing alternative effective protective measures thatprovide effective employee protection.  
In short, a hazardous energy control program is
a critical part of an overall strategy to preventworkplace amputations during machine servicingand maintenance activities, such as during the set-ting up of machines for production purposes, by-passing guards to clear jams or lubricate parts, andinspecting, adjusting, replacing, or otherwise serv-icing machine parts.  Machine amputations occurwhen an employer does not have or fails to imple-ment practices and procedures to disable and con-trol a machine’s energy sources during machineservicing and maintenance work.
1U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS); Annual Survey data, Table R25.  Number of non-fatal occupational injuries or illnesses involving daysaway from work by source of injury or illness and select-ed natures of injury or illness, 2005. \nis removed either automatically or manually, a new
work-piece is fed into the die, and the process isrepeated. (See Figure 23 .)
Figure 23  Part Revolution Mechanical Power Press with
a T wo-Hand Control
Controls for Machines with Clutches
Certain machines can be categorized based on
the type of clutch they use—full-revolution orpart-revolution. Differing modes of operation forthese two clutches determine the type of guard-ing that can be used.
Full-revolution clutches, once activated, com-
plete a full cycle of the slide (lowering and rais-ing of the slide) before stopping at dead centerand cannot be disengaged until the cycle is com-plete. So, presence-sensing devices will notwork and operators must be protected duringthe entire press operating cycle. For example,properly applied barrier guards or two-handtrip devices that are installed at a safe distancefrom the hazard area may be used.
Machines incorporating full-revolution
clutches, such as mechanical power presses,must also incorporate a single-stroke device andanti-repeat feature.
The majority of part-revolution presses are
air clutch and brake. They are designed to trapair in a chamber or tube. When the compressedair is put into these chambers, the clutch isengaged, the brake disengaged and the press makes a single stroke. To stop the press, the
reverse takes place. Thus, the part-revolutionclutch can be disengaged at any time during thecycle to stop the cycle before it completes thedownstroke. 
For safeguarding purposes, part-revolution
mechanical power presses can be equipped withpresence-sensing devices, but full-revolutionmechanical power presses cannot.  
NOTE:  Likewise, most hydraulic power presses
and their associated control systems are similar topart-revolution mechanical power presses in thatthe slide can be stopped at any point in the cycle.In order to ensure the integrity of the safety-relatedfunctions, safeguarding devices (such as presence-sensing devices) may only be used on hydraulicpower presses that are properly designed and con-structed (in accordance with good engineeringpractice) to accommodate the safeguarding system.Refer to OSHA’s Machine Guarding eTool for addi-tional information on hydraulic presses.
Amputations occurring from the point of opera-
tion hazards are the most common types of injuriesassociated with mechanical power presses.Improperly applied safeguarding methods (such asusing a guard with more than maximum allowableopenings or 2-hand palm buttons that are mountedwithin the safety distance of the press) may allowoperators unsafe access to the press’s hazardousarea. These unsafe conditions may result in anamputation when an operator, for example, instinc-tively reaches into the point of operation to adjust amisaligned part or release a jam. Also, amputationsoccur when an operator’s normal feeding rhythm isinterrupted, resulting in inadvertent placement of theoperator’s hands in the point of operation. Suchinjuries usually happen while the operator is ridingthe foot pedal.  Additionally, some amputations arelinked to mechanical (such as the failure of a single-stroke linkage), electrical (such as a control relay fail-ure), or pneumatic (such as the loss of air pressureto the clutch/brake) machine component failure.
Examples of inadequate or ineffective safe-
guarding and hazardous energy control practicesinclude the following:
•  Guards and devices disabled to increase produc-
tion, to allow the insertion of small-piece work, orto allow better viewing of the opera tion.   
•  Two-hand trips/controls bridged or tied-down to
allow initiation of the press cycle using only onehand. 
•  Devices such as pullbacks or restraints improp-
erly adjusted.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 21
Control 
Box
Control BoxLight
Curtain\n•  Controls of a single-operator press bypassed by
having a coworker activate the controls whilethe operator positions or aligns parts in the die,or repairs or troubleshoots the press.
•  Failure to properly disable, isolate press energy
sources, and lockout/tagout presses before anemployee performs servicing or maintenancework.
Case History #1
While using an unguarded, foot-pedal-operated,full-revolution mechanical power press thatmade trip collars for wood stoves, an employeeused his hands to feed and remove finished partsand scrap metal. He placed the completed part tothe left side of the press, and then turned toplace the scrap in the bin behind him. As heturned back to face the press, he inadvertentlystepped on the foot pedal and activated the presswhile his hand was in the die area. His left handwas amputated at the wrist. 
Case History #2
An employee was operating an unguarded 10-ton, full-revolution mechanical power press tostamp mailbox parts, and using a hand tool toload the press, she placed her left hand in thelower die to reposition a misaligned part. At thesame time, she inadvertently depressed the footpedal, activating the press and crushing her leftindex finger.
Case History #3
A power press operator and helper were instruc-ted to temporarily halt production and eachemployee decided to perform servicing tasks.The operator had a problem with a hydraulicfluid leak and decided to deflect the liquid sprayby installing a temporary barrier while, at thesame time, the helper decided to clean up themetal chips from the press area. The operatorthen activated the press and repositioned thepress slide in order to install the cardboard barri-er.  This mechanical power press action fatally crushed the helper’s head because his head wasbetween the dies while he was in the process ofcleaning up the metal chips. 
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database. 
Safeguarding Mechanical Power Presses  
Mechanical power presses are extremely versatileand selecting appropriate safeguarding methodsdepends on the specific press design and use. Youshould consider the press, the type of clutch used,
22
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administrationthe stock size, the length of production runs, and
the method of feeding.
You can use primary safeguarding methods,
such as guards or safeguarding devices, to preventinjuries. For example, 29 CFR 1910.217 requiresemployers to provide and ensure the use of pointof operation guards or properly installed devices onevery operation performed on a press when the dieopening is greater than 
1/4inch.  
In addition, guards must conform to the maxi-
mum permissible openings of Table O-10 of 29 CFR1910.217. Guards must prevent entry of hands orfingers into the point of operation through, over,under, or around the guard.
Mechanical Power Press Safeguarding 
Methods by Clutch T ype
Full-Revolution Clutch Part-Revolution Clutch
Point of Operation Guard Point of Operation Guard 
Pullback PullbackRestraint RestraintType A Gate Type A GateTwo-Hand Trip Type B Gate*
Two-Hand Control* Presence-Sensing Device*
*”Hands-in-Die” operations require additional safe-
guarding measures: See 1910.217(c)(5).
Mechanical power press point of operation safe-
guards must accomplish the following goals:
•  Prevent or stop the normal press stroke if the
operator’s hands are in the point of operation;or
•  Prevent the operator from reaching into the
point of operation as the die closes; or
•  Withdraw the operator’s hands if inadvertently
placed in the point of operation as the die clos-es; or
•  Prevent the operator from reaching the point of
operation at any time; or
•  Require the operator to use both hands for the
machine controls that are located at such a dis-tance that the slide completes the downwardtravel or stops before the operator can reachinto the point of operation; or
•  Enclose the point of operation before a press
stroke can be started to prevent the operatorfrom reaching into the danger area before die closure or enclose the point of operation priorto stoppage of the slide motion during thedownward stroke.
Source: 29 CFR 1910.217(c)(3)(i).\nFigure 24  Hand-Feeding T ools Used in Conjunction with
Pullbacks on a Power Press
•  Removing scrap or stuck work with tools is
required even when hand feeding is allowedaccording to 29 CFR 1910.217(d)(1)(ii). Em-ployers must furnish and enforce the use ofhand tools for freeing or removing work orscrap pieces from the die to reduce the amountof time an operator’s hand is near the point ofoperation.
•  Control point of operation hazards created when
guards are removed for set-up and repair byoperating the machine in the inch mode.  Thisinvolves using two-hand controls (or a singlecontrol mounted at a safe distance from themachine hazards) to gradually inch the pressthrough a stroke when the dies are being testedon part-revolution clutch presses. 
•  Observe energy control procedures and prac-
tices for press servicing and maintenance work.For example, the changing of dies on a mechan-ical power press requires the employer to estab-lish a die-setting procedure that employs point-of-operation safeguarding method(s) such as thesafe usage of an inch or jogsafety device for die
set-up purposes together with LOTO. Thesedevices safely position the mechanical powerpress slide utilizing a point-of-operation safe-guarding technique. Thus, an energy controlprocedure for these types of presses would
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 23“No Hands-in-Die” Policy  
In general, a “no-hands-in-die” policy needs to
be implemented and followed whenever possible– that is, in the event the press is not designedfor “hands-in-die” production work.  Under thispolicy, operators must never place their hands inthe die area (point-of-operation) while perform-ing normal production operations. Adherence tothis safety practice will reduce the risk of point ofoperation amputations.
In terms of part-revolution mechanical power
presses that use a two-hand control, presence-sensing device or type B gate, OSHA does allow
“hands-in-die” operation if the press control reli-ability and brake monitoring system require-ments are met. If these press design safety fea-tures are not complied with, then employersmust incorporate a “no-hands-in-die” policy.  
Source:  29 CFR 1910.217(c)(5).
Other Controls for Mechanical Power
Press Servicing and Maintenance    
Secondary safeguarding methods may be used
alone or in combination (to achieve near equivalentprotection) only when the employer can show thatit is impossible to use any of the primary safe-guarding methods. The following are some workpractices, complementary equipment and energycontrol measures that may be used to supplementprimary safeguarding:  
•  If employees operate presses under a “no-
hands-in-die” policy using complementary feed-ing methods such as hand-tool feeding, employ-ers still must protect operators through the useof primary safeguarding methods, such as aproperly applied two-hand control or trip safe-guarding device. Hand-tool feeding alone doesnot ensure that the operator’s hands cannotreach the danger area. ( Figure 24 illustrates the
use of hand-feeding tools in conjunction withpullbacks on a power press.)
Ram Up-Die Open
Ram Descending-Die Closing\nneed to integrate both point-of-operation safe-
guarding method(s) for slide positioning as wellas LOTO procedures for the die setting opera-tion.  
Additional power press energy control precau-
tions (e.g., use of safety blocks; LOTO the press dis-connect switch if re-energization presents a hazard)will be necessary if employees need to place theirhands/arms in a press working area (the spacebetween the bolster plate and the ram/slide) toperform the servicing and/or maintenance activity(such as adjusting, cleaning or repairing dies) be-cause the inch or jogsafety device will not pro tect
employees from ram movement due to potentialmechanical energy (resulting from the ram/slideposition and associated gravitational force), presscomponent or control system malfunction, or pressactivation by others.
Minor Servicing   
At times, OSHA recognizes that some minor
servicing may have to be performed during nor-mal production operations, so a lockout/tagoutexception is allowed.  See the 29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note for details. For example, a press oper-ator may need to perform a minor die cleaningtask on a regular basis for product quality pur-poses and the use of safety blocks – insertedbetween the press dies – that are interlocked withthe press electrical controls would constituteeffective protection. Properly designed andapplied safety block interlocks may be used inlieu of locking or tagging out the press’s electricalenergy source for purposes of the minor servic-ing exception.
Source: 29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note.
Training   
Training is essential for employee protection. As anemployer, you should:
•  Train operators in safe mechanical press opera-
tion and hazardous energy control (lockout/tagout) procedures and techniques before theybegin work on the press. 
•  Supervise operators to ensure that correct pro-
cedures and techniques are being followed.
Additional Requirements     
In addition, work practices such as regular mechan-ical power press inspection, maintenance, andreporting are essential.•  29 CFR 1910.217(e)(1)(i) requires a program of
periodic and regular inspections of mechanicalpower presses to ensure that all of the pressparts, auxiliary equipment and safeguards arein safe operating condition and adjustment.Inspection certification records must be main-tained.
•  29 CFR 1910.217(e)(1)(ii) requires you to inspect
and test the condition of the clutch/brake mech-anism, anti-repeat feature, and single-strokemechanism on at least a weekly basis for press-es without control reliability and brake systemmonitoring. Certification records must be main-tained of these inspections and the maintenanceperformed.
•  29 CFR 1910.217(g)(1) requires the reporting of
all point of operation injuries to operators or
other employees within 30 days to either theDirector of the Directorate of Standards andGuidance, OSHA, U.S. Department of Labor,
Washington, DC 20210, or the state agency
administering a plan approved by OSHA. Youcan also use the Internet to report injuries (www.osha.gov/pls/powerpress/mechanical.html). 
Applicable Standards
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.217, Mechanical power presses.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus. 
Sources of Additional Information
•  OSHA Instruction CPL 3-00-002 [CPL 2-1.35],
National Emphasis Program on Amputations
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  NIOSH CIB 49, Injuries and Amputations
Resulting From Work with Mechanical PowerPresses (May 22, 1987)
•  OSHA Instruction STD 01-12-021 [STD 1-
12.21]—29 CFR 1910.217, Mechanical Power
Presses, Clarifications (10/30/78)
•  ANSI B11.1-2001, Safety Requirements for
Mechanical Power Presses 
24
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration\nPower Press Brakes   
Power press brakes are similar to mechanical
power presses in that they use vertical reciprocat-ing motion and are used for repetitive tasks. Pressbrake operation is either mechanical or hydraulic. 
Press brakes are either general-purpose or spe-
cial-purpose brakes, according to ANSI B11.3-2002,Safety Requirements for Power Press Brakes .
General purpose press brakes have a single opera-tor control station. A servo-system activates thespecial purpose brake, which may be equippedwith multiple operator/helper control stations. (SeeFigure 25 for a power press brake operation.)
Figure 25  Power Press Brake Bending Metal
Hazards of Power Press Brakes   
As with mechanical power presses, point of opera-
tion injuries are the most common type of injuryassociated with power press brakes. Here are somefrequent causes of amputations from power pressbrakes:
•  Foot controls being inadvertently activated while
the operator’s hand is in the point of operation.The likelihood of this type of injury increases asthe size of stock decreases and brings the opera-tor’s hands closer to the point of operation.  
•  Parts of the body caught in pinch points created
between the stock and the press brake framewhile the bend is being made.  
•  Controls of a single-operator press bypassed by
having a coworker activate the controls while
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 25the operator positions or aligns stock or repairs
or troubleshoots the press.
•  Failure to properly lockout/tagout presses during
the necessary tasks of making adjustments,clearing jams, performing maintenance,installing or aligning dies, or cleaning themachine.
Case History #4
An operator was bending small parts using an80-ton unguarded press brake. This required theemployee’s fingers to be very close to the pointof operation; and, consequently, the operator lostthree fingers when his hand entered the pointof operation. The operator on the previous shifthad reported to the supervisor that the opera-tor placed his fingers close to the point of opera-
tion, but was told that nothing could be done andthat the operator should be careful.
Case History #5
An operator was bending metal parts using a 36-ton part-revolution power press brake that wasfoot-activated and equipped with a light curtain.About 3-4 inches of the light curtain had been“blanked out” during a previous part run. Whileadjusting a part at the point of operation, theemployee accidentally activated the foot pedaland amputated three fingertips.
Safeguarding Power Press Brakes    
Primary safeguarding methods, such as physicalguards and point of operation safeguarding devices(movable barrier devices, presence-sensing de-vices, pull-back devices, restraint devices, single-and two-hand devices) can be used to effectivelyguard power press brakes. ( Figure 26 shows a gen-
eral-purpose power press brake used in conjunc-tion with pullbacks.) Some safeguarding methods,such as presence-sensing devices, may requiremuting or blanking to allow the bending of materi-al.  Always ensure that these safety devices areproperly installed, maintained, and used in accor-dance with the manufacturer’s guidelines for thespecific stock and task to be performed. Failure todo so could leave sensing field channels "blankedout" and expose operators to point-of-operation hazards as the safeguarding device’s safety dis-tance increases when blanking is used.
Press BedPoint of Operation\nFigure 26  T wo-Person Power Press Brake Operation
with Pullbacks
In other instances, such as with special-purpose
power press brakes, machines are equipped withadvanced control systems that are adaptable to allforms of safeguarding concepts and devices, suchas two-hand controls and multiple operator/helperactuating controls. For example, two-hand down,
foot through (actuation) methods are used to safe-
guard employees while they operate press brakes.With this safeguarding system, an operator uses atwo-hand control to lower the press brake ram, forexample, to within 
1/4inch or less of the lower die
(which is considered a safe opening). The operatorthen has the ability to maneuver and align thework-piece within this 
1/4inch safe opening area
and he or she is protected from the amputationhazard. Then the foot control is used by the opera-tor to safely actuate the machine to produce thedesired product.  
Because of constraints imposed by certain man-
ufacturing or fabricating processes, safeguardingby maintaining a safe distance from the point of
operation may be acceptable. However, this is per-mitted only when safeguarding by barrier guardor safeguarding devices is not feasible (impossi-ble) – that is, where the use of primary safeguard-ing method (such as a restraint device) is not fea-sible. Additional information about a safe distance
safeguarding program can be found in OSHA
Instruction 02-01-025 [CPL 2-1.25] – Guidelines for
Point of Operation Guarding of Power PressBrakes.
26
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationOther Controls for Power Press Brakes     
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods and complementary equipment that maybe used to supplement primary safeguarding oralone or in combination when primary safeguard-ing methods are not feasible:  
•  Safe distance safeguarding,
•  Safe holding safeguarding,•  Safe work procedures,•  Work-holding equipment (such as back gauges),•  Properly designed and protected foot pedals,
and
•  Hand-feeding tools.
Ensure that proper safeguarding and lockout/
tagout procedures are developed and implementedfor power press brakes. Train and supervise em-ployees in these procedures and conduct periodicinspections to ensure compliance.
Applicable Standards
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus. 
Sources of Additional Information
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  OSHA Directive – CPL 02-01-025 [CPL 2-1.25],
Guidelines for Point of Operation Guarding ofPower Press Brakes
•  ANSI B11.3-2002, Safety Requirements for
Power Press Brakes
Hazards of Con veyors      
Conveyors are used in many industries to transport
materials horizontally, vertically, at an angle, oraround curves. Many conveyors have different andunique features and uses, so that hazards vary due
WristletsPoint of 
OperationPress Bed\nto the material conveyed, the location of the con-
veyor, and the proximity of the conveyer to theemployees. Types include unpowered and pow-ered, live roller, slat, chain, screw, and pneumatic.Conveyors eliminate or reduce manual materialhandling tasks, but they present amputation haz-ards associated with mechanical motion.  (SeeFigures 27 through 30 for examples of common
conveyors.)
Conveyor-related injuries typically involve a
employee’s hands or fingers becoming caught innip points or shear points on conveyors and mayoccur in these situations:
•  Cleaning and maintaining a conveyor, especially
when it is still operating.  
•  Reaching into an in-going nip point to remove
debris or to free jammed material. 
•  Allowing a cleaning cloth or an employee’s
clothing to get caught in the conveyor and pullthe employee’s fingers or hands into the con-veyor.  
Other conveyor-related hazards include improp-
erly guarded gears, sprocket and chain drives, hori-zontal and vertical shafting, belts and pulleys, andpower transmission couplings. Overhead convey-ors warrant special attention because most of theconveyor’s drive train is exposed. Employees havealso been injured or killed while working in areasunderneath conveyors and in areas around lubrica-tion fittings, tension adjusters, and other equipmentwith hazardous energy sources. 
Case History #6
While removing a cleaning rag from the ingoingnip point between the conveyor belt and its tailpulley (the unpowered end of the conveyor), anemployee’s arm became caught in the pulley,which amputated his arm below the elbow.
Case History #7
While servicing a chain-and-sprocket driveassembly on a roof tile conveyor system, anemployee turned off the conveyor, removed theguard, and began work on the drive assemblywithout locking out the system. When someonestarted the conveyor, the employee’s fingersbecame caught in the chain-and-sprocket driveand were amputated.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 27Figure 27  Belt Co nveyor
Figure 28  Screw Conveyor
Figure 29  Chain Driven Live Roller Co nveyor
Fixed Guard Over
Power-T ransmissionApparatusBelt
In-Running Nip
Some guards and covers are not shown to facilitate
viewing of moving parts. Equipment must not beoperated without guards and covers in place.Fixed Guard Over
Power-T ransmissionApparatus
In-Running Nip PointFixed Guard 
In-Running 
Nip Point
Screw
Rotating Motion
Fixed Guard In-Running 
Nip Point
Chain
In-Running 
Nip PointFixed Guard 
Sprocket
Roller\nFigure 30  Slat Co nveyor
Safeguarding Con veyors      
As conveyor hazards vary depending on the appli-
cation, employers need to look at each conveyor toevaluate and determine what primary safeguardingmethods and energy control (lockout/tagout)practices are required. Where necessary for the
protection of employees, conveyors need to havemechanical guards that protect the employee fromnip points, shear points, and other moving parts,including power-transmission apparatus. Guardsmay include barriers, enclosures, grating, fences, orother obstructions that prevent inadvertent physicalcontact with operating machine components, suchas point of operation areas, belts, gears, sprockets,chains, and other moving parts. A brief descriptionof the hazards and recognized safeguarding meth-ods is presented for common types of conveyors. 
T ypical Con veyor Hazards and 
Safeguarding Methods  
Belt Conveyors
Hazards: Belt-conveyor drive mechanisms and
conveying mediums are hazardous as are the fol-lowing belt-conveyor areas: 1) conveyor take-upand discharge ends; 2) where the belt or chainenters or exits the in-going nip point; 3) wherethe belt wraps around pulleys; 4) snub rollerswhere the belt changes direction, such as take-ups; 5) where multiple conveyors are adjoined;or 6) on transfers or deflectors used with beltconveyors.  
Controls: The hazards associated with nip and
shear points must be safeguarded. Side guards(spill guards), if properly designed can preventemployee contact with power-transmission com-ponent, in-going nip points and the conveying medium. Secondary safeguarding methods for
hazard control include the use of standard railingsor fencing, or safeguarding by distance (location),and installing hazard awareness devices, such aspre-start-up signals and warning signs.
Screw Conveyors
Hazards: Screw conveyors are troughs with a
revolving longitudinal shaft on which a spiral ortwisted plate is designed.  In-going nip points, ofturning helical flights for the entire length of thescrew conveyor, exist between the revolvingshaft and trough.  Since the trough is not usuallyrequired to be covered for proper operation ofthe conveyor and because many screw convey-ors are located at or near the floor level, the haz-ard of stepping into the danger area is ever pres-ent. Once caught, the victim is pulled further intothe path of the conveying medium. 
Controls: A screw conveyor housing must com-
pletely enclose the moving elements (screwmechanism, power transmission apparatus) ofthe conveyor, except for the loading and dis-charge points. Permanently affixed grids or poly-carbonate can be installed for visibility purposesto allow the operator to inspect the operation.Alternatively, the trough side walls should behigh enough to prevent employees from reach-ing over and falling into the trough. Opentroughs can be used if covers are not feasible;but employees need to be protected by second-ary safeguarding methods, such as a railing orfence.   
Feed loading and discharge points can usually
be guarded by providing enclosures, screening,grating, or some other interruption across theopenings which will allow the passage of thematerial without allowing the entry of a part ofthe employee’s body into the moving part(s).  
Chain Conveyors 
Hazards: Nip points occur when a chain contacts
a sprocket, such as when a chain runs around asprocket or when the chain is supported by asprocket or when a shoe above the chain pre-cludes the chain from lifting off the sprocket. Nippoints also occur at drives, terminals, take-ups(automatic take-ups may also have shear points),and idlers.  Employee clothing, jewelry, and longhair may also get entangled and caught in themoving chain conveyor.   
28
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
Fixed Guard Over
Power-T ransmissionApparatusIn-Running 
Nip Point
Fixed Guard Slats\nControls: Sometimes, moving chains cannot be
enclosed without impairing the functioning of theconveyor. However, in some cases, barrierguards may be installed around the moving partsfor hazard enclosure purposes or, in other in-stances, nip and shear points may be eliminatedby placing a guard at the nip point or shearpoint. Other secondary safeguarding optionsinclude safeguarding by distance (location) andthe use of awareness devices.
Roller Conveyors
Hazards: Roller conveyors are used to move
material on a series of parallel rollers that areeither powered or gravity-fed. Powered rollerconveyors have the hazard of snagging andpulling objects, including hands, hair, and cloth-ing into the area between the rollers and the sta-tionary components of the conveyor.  In-goingnip points generally exist between the drivechain and sprockets; between belt and carrierrollers; and at terminals, drives, take-ups, idlers,and snub rollers.  
Controls: Roller conveyors need to, where feasi-
ble, have permanent barrier guards that can beadjusted as necessary to protect the employeefrom nip and shear points. For example, theunused section of rollers closest to the employ-ees needs to be guarded when transportingsmall items on a roller conveyor that do notrequire the use of the entire roller width. Also,conveyor hazards may be reduced by eliminatingor minimizing projections from the roller andthrough the use of pop-up rollers. Other second-ary safeguarding options include safeguardingby distance (location) and the use of awarenessdevices.
Other Controls for Con veyors       
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement pri-mary safeguarding or alone or in combinationwhen primary safeguarding methods are not feasi-ble:  
•  Safeguarding by safe distance (by location) —
locating moving parts away from employees toprevent accidental contact with the hazardpoint—is one option for safeguarding convey-ors. It is particularly difficult, however, to usethis method when employees need to be at or
near unguarded moving parts.
•  Use prominent awareness devices, such as
warning signs or lights, to alert employees tothe conveyor operation.
•  Allow only trained individuals to operate con-
veyors and only trained, authorized staff to per-form servicing and maintenance work.
•  Visually inspect the entire conveyor and imme-
diate work area prior to start-up to determinethat the actuation will not cause an employeehazard. 
•  Inspect and test conveyor safety mechanisms,
such as its alarms, emergency stops, and safe-guarding methods.  
•  Do not use any conveyor which is unsafe until it
is made safe.
•  Forbid employees from riding on conveyors.•  Prohibit employees working with or near con-
veyors from wearing loose clothing or jewelry,and require them to secure long hair with a netor cap.
•  Install emergency stop devices on conveyors
where employees work when they cannot other-wise control the movement of the conveyor.This recognized safety feature provides employ-ees with the means to shut off the equipment inthe event of a hazardous situation or emergencyincident.  
For emergency stop devices, you will need these
engineering controls:
•  Equip conveyors with interlocking devices that
shut them down during an electrical or mechani-cal overload such as product jam or other stop-page. Emergency devices need to be installed sothat they cannot be overridden from other loca-tions.  
•  When conveyors are arranged in a series, all
should automatically stop whenever one stops.  
•  Equip conveyors with emergency stop controls
that require manual resetting before resumingconveyor operation.  
•  Install clearly marked, unobstructed emergency
stop buttons or pull cords within easy reach ofemployees.
•  Provide continuously accessible conveyor belts
with emergency stop cables that extend theentire length of the conveyor belt to allow access tothe cable from any point along the belt.  
•  Ensure that conveyor controls or power sources
can accept a lockout/tagout device to allow safemaintenance practices.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 29\nSources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  ASME B20.1-2003, Safety Standard for
Conveyors and Related Equipment.
•  ANSI/CEMA 350-2003, Screw Conveyors.
•  ANSI/CEMA 401-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Roller Conveyors—Non-powered.
•  ANSI/CEMA 402-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Belt Conveyors.
•  ANSI/CEMA 403-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Belt Driven Live Roller Conveyors.
•  ANSI/CEMA 404-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Chain Driven Live RollerConveyors.
•  ANSI/CEMA 405-2003, Package Handling
Conveyors—Slat Conveyors
Hazards of Printing Presses      
Printing presses vary by type and size, rangingfrom relatively simple manual presses to the com-plex large presses used for printing newspapers,magazines, and books. Printing presses are oftenpart of a larger system that also includes cutting,binding, folding, and finishing equipment. Manymodern printing presses rely on computer controls,and the high speeds of such equipment often re-quire rapid machine adjustments to avoid waste. 
This section discusses amputation hazards asso-
ciated with two common types of printing presses:web-fed and sheet-fed printing press systems.Web-fed printing presses are fed by large continu-ous rolls of substrate such as paper, fabric orplastic; sheet-fed printing presses, as their name
implies, are fed by large sheets of substrate. In bothtypes, the substrate typically feeds through a seriesof cylinders containing printing plates and support-ing cylinders moving in the opposite direction.(Figures 31 and 32 illustrate a roll-to-roll offset
printing press and a sheet-fed offset printing press.)
30
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard. For example, instructemployees to lubricate, align, service, and main-tain conveyors when the conveyor is locked ortagged out if the task would expose them to anarea of the conveyor (or adjacent machinery)where hazardous energy exists.
Minor Servicing   
At times, OSHA recognizes that some minor
servicing may have to be performed during nor-mal production operations, so a lockout/tagoutexception is allowed. See the 29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note for details. An example of a commonconveyor minor servicing activity involves pack-age jams where an employee must frequentlydislodge the jam. To prevent unexpected start-upof the conveyor, employers may adopt alterna-tive control measures, such as opening (placingin the off position) local disconnects or controlswitches to pr event conveyor start-up. These
properly applied devices, if used, must beunder the exclusive control of the employee per-
forming the jam release, so that no other personcan restart the conveyor without the knowledge
and consent of the person performing the servic-ing work.  
Source: 29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note.
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus.
•  29 CFR 1910.269, Electric power generation,
transmission and distribution [as detailed in
section (v)(11)].
•  29 CFR 1926.555, Conveyors.
•  ANSI B20.1-57, Safety Code for Conveyors,
Cableways, and Related Equipment – as incor-
porated by reference in 1910.218(j)(3),1910.261(a)(3)(x), 1910.261(b)(1),1910.261(c)(15)(iv), 1910.261(f)(4),1910.261(j)(2), 1910.265(c)(18)(i)].\nFigure 31  Roll-to-Roll Offset Printing Press
Figure 32  Sheet-Fed Offset Printing Press
As with other machines, printing press-related
amputations occur during servicing and mainte-nance activities. For example, amputations occurwhen employees get their fingers or hands caughtin the in-going nip points created between tworollers while:
•  Hand-feeding the leading edge of paper into the
in-running rollers during press set-up while themachine is operating;
•  Adjusting ink flow on a press;•  Cleaning ink off the press while it is operating; •  Attempting to free material from the rollers;•  Straightening misaligned sheets of paper in the
press;
•  Jogging the printer and making adjustments to
the equipment (such as adjusting the nip wheelon a sheeter);
•  Using rags to clean machinery adjacent to un-
guarded rollers.
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.Case History #8An employee was adding ink at the top of aprinting press when he spotted a small piece ofwood in the area of the moving rollers.  Hecaught his hand in the moving rollers as heattempted to remove the wood and had to havehis forearm surgically amputated.
Case History #9
An offset printing press operator lost his righthand while attempting to remove dried ink on amoving roller using a rag.  The guard coveringthe lower ink train rollers had been flipped up,exposing the rollers.  The rag got caught in anearby roller, pulling the employee’s hand intothe in-going nip point.  The employee immediate-ly hit the press stop button, but the roller rotatedone-half turn before stopping.  His hand wascrushed and had to be amputated at the hospital.
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
Safeguarding Printing Presses      
As with most machinery, you can rely on primarysafeguarding methods to protect employeesagainst injuries when using printing presses. Forexample, some primary safeguarding methodsinclude the following:
•  Install guards on all mechanical hazard points
that are accessible during normal operation --such as accessible in-going nip points betweenrollers and power-transmission apparatus(chains and sprockets).
•  Safeguard nip point hazards with barrier guards
or nip guards. Nip guards need to be designedand installed without creating additional haz-ards.  
•  Install fixed barrier guards, with tamper-proof
fasteners, at rollers that do not require operatoraccess.
•  Properly designed, applied, and maintained
safeguarding devices (such as presence-sensingdevices and mats) may also be used to keepyour body out of machine danger areas. How-ever, these control circuit devices are no substi-tute for lockout/tagout. 
•  Use hold-to-run controls (such as inch or re-
verse) that protect employees from machinemechanical hazards by either: 1) requiring theuse of both hands for control initiation purpos-es; or 2) are mounted at a safe distance so thatan employee cannot inch or reverse the press
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 31
\nand simultaneously access any unguarded dan-
ger area or otherwise reach into the danger zonewhile the press is operating.
Other Controls for Printing Presses      
The following are some secondary safeguardingmethods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement primarysafeguarding or alone or in combination when pri-mary safeguarding methods are not feasible:
•  Make sure that printing presses attended by
more than one operator or ones outside of theoperator’s viewing area are equipped with visualand audible warning devices to alert employeesregarding the press’s operational status—inoperation, safe mode, or impending operation.
•  Install visual warning devices of sufficient num-
ber and brightness and locate them so that theyare readily visible to press personnel.
•  Ensure that audible alarms are loud enough to
be heard above background noise.  
•  Provide a warning system that activates for at
least 2 seconds prior to machine motion.
•  Use additional secondary safeguarding methods
such as safeguarding by location and safe work(operating) procedures for printing presses. 
•  Ensure that all press operators receive appropri-
ate training and supervision until they can worksafely on their own.
•  Prohibit employees working with or near print-
ing presses from wearing loose clothing or jew-elry and require them to secure long hair with anet or cap. 
•  Conduct periodic inspections to ensure compli-
ance.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard. 
Minor Servicing   
At times, OSHA recognizes that some minor
servicing may have to be performed during nor-mal production operations, so a lockout/tagoutexception is allowed. See the 29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note for details.  Minor servicing caninclude, among other things, tasks such as clear-ing of certain types of minor paper jams; minorcleaning; minor lubricating and minor adjustingoperations; certain plate and blanket changing 
32
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administrationtasks; and, in some cases, paper webbing and 
paper roll changing. Generally speaking, minorservicing is considered to include those tasksinvolving operations that can be safely accom-plished by employees and where extensive dis-assembly of equipment is not required.  
One such control method that does offer effec-
tive alternative protection is the inch-safe-servicetechnique when it is used in conjunction with themain drive control. This technique is specified inthe American National Standards (ANSI B65.1and ANSI B65.2) for web- and sheet-fed printingpresses and binding and finishing equipment,respectively.    
Also, interlock guards and presence-sensing
safeguarding devices, if properly designed,applied and maintained, would also be consid-ered effective protection. For example, you couldsimply open the barrier guard and rely on theprotection afforded by the properly designedinterlock control circuit while clearing minorpaper jams and other minor servicing functionsthat occur using normal production operationsand which meet the criteria in the lockout/tagoutexception.
Source: 29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note.
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus.
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  ANSI B65.1-2005, Safety Standard - Printing
Press Systems\nHazards of Roll-Forming and 
Roll-Bending Machines      
Roll-forming and roll-bending machines primarily
perform metal bending, rolling, or shaping func-tions. Roll-forming is the process of bending acontinuous strip of metal to gradually form a pre-determined shape using a self-contained machine.Roll-forming machines contain a series of rolls thatmay or may not have braking systems. Roll-form-ing machines may also perform other processeson the metal, including piercing holes, slots, ornotches; stamping; flanging; and stretch-bending.Roll-bending machines usually have three rollsarranged like a pyramid and they perform essential-ly the same process as roll-forming, except that themachine produces a bend across the width of flator pre-formed metal to achieve a curved or angularconfiguration.  
Roll-forming and roll-bending machines fre-
quently are set up and operated by one person.(Figure 33 illustrates a roll-forming machine pro-
ducing a finished product. Figure 34 illustrates the
in-feed section of a roll-forming machine.)
Figure 33  Roll-Forming Machine
Figure 34  In-Feed Area of a Roll-Forming Machine
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 33The most common type of amputation hazard
associated with roll-forming and roll-bendingmachines are point of operation hazards created byin-running nip points. Amputations occur when thehands of the operator feeding material through therolls get caught and are then pulled into the pointof operation. Causes of amputations related to roll-forming and roll-bending machines can occur fromthe following:
•  Having an unguarded or inadequately guarded
point of operation;
•  Locating the operator control station too close to
the process;  
•  Activating the machine inadvertently; and •  Performing cleaning, clearing, changing, or
inspecting tasks while the machine is operatingor is not properly locked or tagged out. 
Case History #10
While feeding a metal sheet into a roller, anemployee caught his right hand in the roller andamputated one finger.  
Case History #11
An employee wearing gloves caught his lefthand in a roll-forming machine, resulting in par-tial amputation of two fingers. The employeewas standing close to the moving rollers, feedingflat steel sheet from behind and catching it onthe front side. There was no point of operationguard on the front roller and the foot operatingpedal was very close to the machine.
Safeguarding Roll-Forming and Roll-
Bending Machines      
Roll-forming and roll-bending machines are avail-
able in a wide variety of sizes and designs, andsafeguarding methods must be tailored for eachmachine. Several factors affect the ways to safe-guard the equipment, including whether a machinehas a brake system, its size, operating speed, thick-ness of product, length of production runs, requiredproduction accuracy, sheet feeding methods, andpart removal methods.  Depending on the size andtype of machine, a number of different primarysafeguarding methods may be required to ade-quately protect the operator as well as other em-ployees nearby. For example, you can do the following:
•  Install fixed or adjustable point of operation bar-
rier guards at the in-feed and out-feed sectionsof machines. If the stock or end-product does
Entering
StockFinished
Product
Operator
ControlStation
Guide RollersPower T ransmission Apparatus
Entering
Stock
In-Running Nip Point\nthe rolls stop turning (via a brake and clutch
assembly) when you release the foot switch.
•  Develop and implement safe work (operating)
procedures for roll-forming and roll-bendingmachines.
•  Safeguard operator control stations to prevent
inadvertent activation by unauthorized employees.
•  Ensure that all operators receive appropriate on-
the-job training under the direct supervision ofexperienced operators until they can work safelyon their own.
•  Prohibit employees working with or near print-
ing presses from wearing loose clothing or jew-elry and require them to secure long hair with anet or cap.
•  Install safety trip controls, such as a pressure-
sensitive body bar or safety tripwire cable, onthe in-feed section of the machine to shut downthe machine if an employee gets too close to thepoint of operation. 
•  Install emergency stop controls that are readily
accessible to the operator.  
•  Conduct periodic inspections to ensure compli-
ance.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus. 
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  ANSI B11.12-2005, Safety Requirements for
Roll-Forming and Roll-Bending Machines
34
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administrationnot differ greatly from run to run, a fixed guard
may be preferable. If the stock or end-product isvariable, however, an adjustable guard may bemore suitable.  
•  Install fixed point of operation guards to cover
the sides of the rollers to prevent entry of cloth-ing and parts of your body into the in-going nippoints of the rollers. 
•  Install fixed or interlocked guards to cover any
other rotating parts, such as power-transmissionapparatus. 
•  Install and use properly applied presence-sens-
ing safeguarding devices (light curtains, safetymats) on roll-forming and roll-bending machines(those equipped with brakes) to protect youfrom hazardous machine areas during normalproduction operations. 
•  Install and use properly applied two-hand con-
trol safeguarding devices to protect you fromthe machine hazards during roll-bending pro-duction operations.
•  Ensure that operators use the jog mode during
feeding operations, if appropriate, and that thecontrol station requires the use of both handsor is mounted at a safe distance from the ma-chine’s danger areas.
•  Allow only one control station to operate at any
one time when a single machine has more thanone set of operator controls. This does not applyto the emergency stop controls, which must beoperable from all locations at all times, such asaccessible in-going nip points between rollersand power-transmission apparatus (chains andsprockets).
Other Controls for Roll-Forming and
Roll-Bending Machines      
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement primarysafeguarding or alone or in combination when pri-mary safeguarding methods are not feasible:
•  Use proper lighting and awareness barrier
devices (such as interlocking gates around theperimeter of the machine to prevent unautho-rized entry), awareness signals and signs.
•  Position (safeguard by location) operating sta-
tions in a way that ensures that operators arenot exposed to the machine’s point of operation.
•  Locate foot pedal controls away from the point
of operation and guard them in such a way as toprevent inadvertent activation. Some foot con-trols use dead-man (hold-to-run) features so that\nHazards of Shearing Machines       
Mechanical power shears contain a ram for their
shearing action.  The ram moves a non-rotaryblade at a constant rate past the edge of a fixedblade.  Shears may be mechanically, hydraulically,hydra-mechanically, pneumatically, or manuallypowered and are used to perform numerous func-tions such as squaring, cropping, and cutting tolength. 
In the basic shear operation, stock is fed into the
point of operation between two blades.  A hold-down may then be activated that applies pressureto the stock to prevent movement.  One completecycle consists of a downward stroke of the topblade until it passes the lower fixed blade followedby an upward stroke to the starting position. (SeeFigures 35 and 36 for examples of alligator and
power squaring shears.)
Figure 35  Hydraulic Alligator Shear
Figure 36  Power Squaring ShearShears can be categorized as stand-alone manu-
al shears, stand-alone automatic shears, andprocess-line shears.
Stand-alone manual shears. An operator controls
them from a control station. The operator feedsthe shear either by hand or by activating theautomatic loading mechanism and activates theequipment using hand or foot controls or a trip-ping device on the back side of the shear. Anexample is an alligator shear.  
Stand-alone automatic shears. These feed and
stroke automatically and continuously. The oper-ator uses hand-activated or foot-activated con-trols to initiate the operation, which requires lim-ited additional operator interaction. An exampleis a guillotine shear.
Process-line shears. These are integrated into an
automated production process and are controlledautomatically as part of the process. Examplesinclude crop shears and cut-to-length shears.
The two primary point-of-operation hazards on
shears are the shear blade and the material hold-downs. Am putations may occur in the following
situations:
•  The foot control inadvertently activates while
the operator’s hands are in the point of opera-tion. Such amputations usually relate to foot-activated, stand-alone manual shears thatrequire the use of both hands to feed the stock. 
•  A tripping device located on the back side of the
shear’s mouth operates the shear but does notprevent the operator from reaching into thehazard area. Such tripping devices, commonlyfound on stand-alone manual shears, may in-crease productivity but must be used in conjunc-tion with primary safeguards. 
•  When there is no hold-down and stock being fed
into a stand-alone manual shear kicks out andstrikes the operator’s hands or fingers.
Case History #12
After breaking metal with a mechanical alliga-tor shear, an employee turned the shear off andwas picking up debris on the ground when heplaced his left hand on the shear and amputat-ed his fingers. The shear’s flywheel was notequipped with a clutch or similar device.  So,when the shear was shut off, the jaw continuedto operate on stored energy.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 35
Hold
DownPoint of 
Operation Guard
Lower 
FixedBlade
To p
Blade\nCase History #13
An employee was cutting material with a 50-inchguillotine shear equipped with two-hand trip but-tons to prevent employees from reaching intothe blade area. He had taped up one of the but-tons and used his knee to trip the other button.With both hands under the blade, he inadvertent-ly hit the free button with his knee. This activateda stroke of the blade which amputated both ofhis hands just below the wrists. 
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
Safeguarding Shearing Machines       
Because shears have a wide variety of applications,safeguarding methods must be determined individ-ually for each machine based on its use. A numberof different safeguarding methods may be neces-sary to adequately protect the operator as well asother employees nearby. For example, you willneed to consider the machine size, operatingspeed, size and type of material, length of produc-tion runs, required accuracy of the work, methodsfor material feeding and removal, operator controls,and clutch type.
Here are some primary safeguarding options for
protecting employees from the shear’s point ofoperation during feeding activities at the front ofthe machine:
•  Install a properly applied fixed or adjustable
point of operation guard at the in-feed of theshearing machine to prevent operator contactwith the shear’s point of operation as well asthe pinch point of the hold- down. The guard’s
design must prevent the employee from reach-ing under or around it.  
•  Install and arrange two-hand trips and controls
so that the operator must use both hands to ini-tiate the shear cycle.  Two-hand trips and con-trols need to be designed so that they cannot bedefeated easily.  The Safety Requirements forShears (ANSI B11.4-2003) standard recommendsthe installation of additional safeguarding whentwo-hand controls are used on part-revolutionshears, based on the nature of the shearingoperation.  This national consensus standardspecifies the use of guards on full-revolutionshears.
•  Use a properly applied presence-sensing
device, such as a light curtain, on shears that
are hydraulically powered or equipped with apart-revolution clutch.
36
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration•  Mount guarded foot-pedal controls at a safe dis-
tance (single control safeguarding devices) awayfrom the point of operation to protect the opera-tor during the operating cycle.
•  Use pull-backs or restraints for stand-alone
manual shears when other guarding methodsare not feasible or do not adequately protectemployees.  (These devices may not be appro-priate if the job requires employees’ mobility.)
•  Use automatic-feeding devices such as convey-
ors with stand-alone manual shears when thematerial is uniform in size and shape.
•  Equip mechanical shears with either a part-revo-
lution or full-revolution clutch.  Methods of safe-guarding depend on the type of clutch in use.Shears equipped with full-revolution clutchesused in single-stroke operations must be equip-ped with an anti-repeat feature.
Other Controls for Shearing Machines      
The following are some secondary safeguardingmethods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement primary safeguarding or alone or in combinationwhen primary safeguarding methods are not feasible:
•  Install guarded operating stations at a safe dis-
tance (safeguarding by location) from theshear’s point of operation to prevent inadvertentactivation. 
•  Develop and implement safe work (operating)
procedures for shearing machines and conductperiodic inspections to ensure compliance.
•  Use proper lighting and awareness devices,
such as awareness barriers and warning signs,to warn employees of the hazard.
•  Install hold-down (work-holding) devices that
prevent the work piece from kicking up andstriking the operator. Hold-down devices mayeliminate the need for employees to hold thematerial near the point of operation.
•  Instruct operators to use distancing tools when
their hands might otherwise reach into the pointof operation because of the size of the materialbeing cut.
•  Where it is possible to stop the shear during
its operating cycle, install an emergency stopdevice—such as a pressure-sensitive body bar,safety tripod, or safety tripwire cable—at thein-feed section of the shear. 
•  Install an awareness barrier or a safety trip con-
trol (safety tripwire or safety tripod) on the backside of the shear.
•  Ensure that all operators receive on-the-job\npushing/guarding device or plunger may be used
to apply pressure to the food against the slicerblade, or pressure may be applied by gravity and/orby an attachment connected to the food holder.(See Figure 37 .)
Figure 37  Meat Slicer
Amputations resulting from work with food
slicers can occur as follows: 
•  When the operator adjusts or services the slicer
while it is still operating or while it is switchedoff but still plugged in, or energized.  In the lattercase, amputations occur when the operator acci-dentally switches the slicer on. 
•  When the operator fails to use the sliding attach-
ment on the food-holding device, especiallywhen slicing small pieces of meat. 
•  When the operator hand-feeds food into a
chute-fed slicer without using the proper push-ing/guarding device or plunger.
Case History #14
Two employees, an operator and an assistant,were using a meat slicer to slice turkey.  Theassistant was holding a box of turkey in a tiltedposition while the operator fed the turkey intothe slicer.  The operator removed the guardfrom the meat slicer because the turkey keptjamming.  The slicer’s knives caught the opera-tor’s glove and pulled his hand into the knives,amputating his finger just above the nail. 
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 37training under the direct supervision of experi-
enced operators until they can work safely ontheir own.
•  Instruct employees to perform routine mainte-
nance on the clutch and braking systems.
•  Instruct employees to inspect all guarding to
ensure that it is in place properly before themachine is operated.
•  Instruct supervisors to ensure that operators
keep their hands out of the shear’s point of oper-ation at all times while the machine is energizedand not properly locked out.
•  Instruct employees not to perform activities on
the back side of a shear while it is operating orstill energized.
•  Prohibit employees from riding the foot activa-
tion pedal.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus 
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout) 
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Instruction CPL 03-00-002, National
Emphasis Program on Amputations.
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  ANSI B11.4-2003, Safety Requirements for
Shears.
Hazards of Food Slicers       
Food slicers are electrically powered machines typi-cally equipped with a rotary blade, an on/off switch,thickness adjustment, and a food holder or chute. AOn/Off
SwitchMeat Holder
Thickness
AdjustmentRotating
Blade\nCase History #15
An employee was cleaning a meat slicer that wasturned off but was still plugged in. He inadver-tently turned the machine on by bumping theon/off switch, resulting in an amputation of hisright ring finger.  
Safeguarding and Other Controls 
for Food Slicers       
Food slicers must be used with guards that cover
the unused portions of the slicer blade on both thetop and bottom of the slicer. You should buy slicersalready equipped with a feeding attachment on thesliding mechanism of the food holder or purchasethe attachment separately and install it before use.Instruct employees to use a pushing/guarding de-vice with chute-fed slicers.   
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement primarysafeguarding or alone or in combination when pri-mary safeguarding methods are not feasible:
•  Develop and implement safe work (operating)
procedures for slicers and conduct periodicinspections to ensure compliance.
•  Ensure that all operators receive on-the-job
training under the direct supervision of experi-enced operators until they can work safely ontheir own.
•  Use warning signs to alert employees of the
hazard and safety instructions.
•  Instruct operators to use plungers to feed food
into chute-fed slicers.  For other slicers, theyshould use the feeding attachment located onthe food-holder.  
•  Never place food into the slicer by hand-feeding
or hand pressure.
•  Instruct operators to retract the slicer blade dur-
ing cleaning operations.
•  Instruct operators to turn off and unplug slicers
when not in use or when left unattended for anyperiod of time.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout), 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.  You can avoid slicerlockout/tagout if the equipment is cord-and-plugconnected equipment simply by having exclu-sive control over the attachment plug after youshut the slicer off and unplug it from the energysource. Hazards of Meat Grinders
Electric meat grinders typically have a feeding trayattached to a tubular throat, a screw auger thatpushes meat to the cutting blade and through thecutting plate, an on/off switch, a reverse switch,and a plunger. (See Figure 38 .)
Figure 38   Stainless Steel Meat Grinder
Amputations can occur when:
•  The operator reaches into the throat of the
grinder while it is still operating or while it isswitched off but still plugged in (energized). Inthe latter case, amputations can occur when theoperator accidentally switches the grinder backon. 
•  The operator fails to use the attached feeding
tray and throat. 
Defective meat grinders, such as ones with
holes in the throat or screw auger area, are also asource of workplace amputations and must betaken out of service.
Case History #16
An operator amputated his arm below the elbowwhile hand-feeding potatoes into a 5-horsepowermeat grinder through a feed throat with a 4-inch-by-6-inch opening and no point of operationguard. This untrained employee had been work-ing on the machine for only 15 minutes. 
Case History #17
An employee amputated her hand about 4 inchesabove the wrist while using an inadequatelyguarded meat grinder. She had disassembled the grinder to clean it, but did not replace the fixedguard along with the stainless steel tray when 
38
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
Feeding T ray
Grinder PlateThroatPlunger\nshe reassembled it. Also, she did not use the
plunger provided for feeding the meat into thegrinder. The machine pulled her hand into the 3-inch diameter auger and amputated it abovethe wrist. 
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
Safeguarding and Other Controls for
Meat Grinders 
Meat grinders must be retrofitted with a primary
safeguard, such as a properly designed taperedthroat or fixed guard, in cases where the machinedesign is such that an employee’s hand may comein contact with the point-of-operation (that is theauger cutter area). You should buy meat grindersalready equipped with this primary safeguard.
The following are some other secondary safe-
guarding methods, work practices, and comple-mentary equipment that may be used to supple-ment primary safeguarding or alone or in combina-tion when primary safeguarding methods are notfeasible:
•  Develop and implement safe work (operating)
procedures for meat grinders to ensure that theguards are adequate and in place, and that thegrinder feeding methods are performed safely.Conduct periodic inspections of grinder opera-tions to ensure compliance.
•  Use warning signs to alert employees of the
hazard and safety instructions.
•  Ensure that all operators receive appropriate
on-the-job training under direct supervision ofexperienced operators until they can work safelyon their own.
•  Provide operators with properly sized plungers
to eliminate the need for their hands to enter thefeed throat during operation.
•  Instruct operators to use the proper plunger
device to feed meat into grinders. No otherdevice should be used to feed the grinder.
•  Instruct employees to operate grinders only with
feeding trays and throats installed.
•  Instruct operators to use the meat grinder only
for its intended purpose.
•  Instruct operators to turn off and unplug grinders
when not in use or when left unattended for anyperiod of time.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout), 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.  You can avoid slicerlockout/tagout if the equipment is cord-and-plugconnected equipment simply by having exclu-sive control over the attachment plug after youshut the slicer off and unplug it from the energysource. 
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus.
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Instruction CPL 03-00-002, National
Emphasis Program on Amputations.
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
Hazards of Meat-Cutting Band Saws       
Band saws can cut wood, plastic, metal, or meat.These saws use a thin, flexible, continuous steelstrip with cutting teeth on one edge that runsaround two large motorized pulleys or wheels. Theblade runs on two pulleys (driver and idler) andpasses through a hole in the work table where theoperator feeds the stock. Blades are available withvarious teeth sizes, and the saws usually haveadjustable blade speeds.
Unlike band saws used in other industries,
meat-cutting band saws are usually constructed ofstainless steel for sanitary purposes and for easycleaning. The table, which may slide or roll, has apushing guard installed to protect the operatorwhile feeding the saw. Meat-cutting band sawsmay also be equipped with a fence and pushingguard to feed the meat through the band saw. (SeeFigure 39 .)
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 39\nFigure 39   Stainless Steel Meat-Cutting Band Saw
Amputations occur most frequently when opera-
tors’ hands contact the running saw blade whilefeeding meat into the saw. The risk of amputationis greatest when operators place their hands tooclose to the saw blade, in a direct line with the sawblade, or beneath the adjustable guard during feed-ing operations. Here are some common causes ofamputations involving meat-cutting band saws: 
•  The operator’s hand slips off the meat or other-
wise accidentally runs through the blade.   
•  The operator attempts to remove meat from the
band saw table while the blade is still moving.
•  The operator’s gloves, jewelry, or loose-fitting
clothing became entangled in the saw blade.
Case History #18
While operating a band saw to cut pork loin, anemployee amputated his right index finger whenhis hand slipped and contacted the moving blade.
Case History #19
An operator amputated the tip of his right ringfinger while using a band saw to cut 
1/4-inch
slabs of meat from a 4-inch thick piece of beef.As the piece of meat got smaller, his hands moved too close to the saw blade. The employee 
was not using the pusher guard provided for thesaw. 
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
Safeguarding and Other Controls for
Meat-Cutting Band Saws 
Primary safeguarding methods that you can use
include the following:
•  Install a self-adjusting guard over the entire
blade, except at the working portion, or pointof operation of the blade.  The guard must beadjustable to cover the unused portion of theblade above the meat during cutting operations.
•  Enclose the pulley mechanism and motor com-
pletely.
The following are some secondary safe guard-
ing methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement pri-mary safeguarding or alone or in combinationwhen primary safeguarding methods are not fea-sible:
•  Develop and implement safe work (operating)
procedures for meat-cutting band saws toensure that the guards are adequate and inplace and that operators safely perform feedingmethods.  
•  Ensure that all operators receive adequate on-
the-job training under the direct supervision ofexperienced operators until they can work safelyon their own.
•  Use warning signs to alert employees of the
hazard and safety instructions.
•  Install a brake on one or both wheels to prevent
the saw blade from coasting after the machine isshut off.
•  Provide a pushing guard or fence to feed meat
into the saw blade.
•  Instruct operators to use the pushing guard or
fence to feed the saw, especially when cuttingsmall pieces of meat.
•  Instruct operators to adjust the point of opera-
tion guard properly to fit the thickness of themeat.
•  Instruct operators to use only sharp meat-cut-
ting blades and to tighten blades to the appro-priate tension with the machine’s tension controldevice.
40
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
Fixed
PowerT ransmissionApparatusGuard
Operator
ControlBladeAdjustable
Point of
Operation
Guard
PushingGuardSliding 
T able\n•  Instruct operators not to wear gloves, jewelry, or
loose-fitting clothing while operating a bandsaw and to secure long hair in a net or cap.
•  Prohibit operators from removing meat from the
band saw while the saw blade is still moving.   
•  Instruct operators to turn off and unplug band
saws when not in use or when left unattendedfor any period of time.
•  Conduct periodic inspections of the saw opera-
tion to ensure compliance.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard. You can avoid slicerlockout/tagout if the equipment is cord-and-plugconnected equipment simply by having exclu-sive control over the attachment plug after youshut the band saw off and unplug it from theenergy source. 
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus.
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  OSHA Publication 3157, A Guide for Protecting
Workers from Woodworking Hazards (http://
www.osha.gov/Publication/osha3157.pdf)
Hazards of Drill Presses       
Electric drill presses use a rotating bit to drill or cutholes in wood or metal.  The holes may be cut to adesired preset depth or completely through thestock. A basic drill press operation consists ofselecting an appropriate drill bit, tightening the bitin the chuck, setting the drill depth, placing thematerial on the drill press bed, securing the work
to the bed so that it will not rotate during drilling,turning the drill press on, and pulling the drill presslever down so that the drill bit will be lowered intothe stock. (See Figure 40 .)
Figure 40   Drill Press with a T ransparent Drill Shield
Amputations typically occur when the operator’s
gloves, loose-fitting clothing, or jewelry becomeentangled in the rotating drill bit. Here are someother causes of drill press-related amputations: 
•  Inadequately guarding points of operation or
power-transmission (such as belt and pulleys)devices;  
•  Removing a part from a drill press while wear-
ing gloves;
•  Making adjustments to the drill press, such as
setting the depth, securing the material to thedrill press bed, and repositioning the wood ormetal, while the drill bit is still rotating; 
•  Changing the drill bit with the operating control
unprotected so that a falling object or otherwisebumping the switch can accidentally start up thepress spindle and tool assembly;
•  Performing servicing and maintenance activities,
such as changing pulleys and belts, without de-energizing and locking/taging out the drill press.
Case History #20
A mechanic amputated the first joints of his leftindex and middle fingers while changing the beltposition on a multi-pulley drill press.  While themechanic was pulling the belt on, it suddenlywent around the outside pulley, pulling themechanic’s fingers through the nip point.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 41
Drill Bit
Clamps to
Hold Work inPlace\nCase History #21
A machinist amputated his left index finger at thefirst joint while drilling holes in a machined part.As he moved the part to begin drilling anotherhole, his gloved hand got caught in the drill bit. 
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
Safeguarding and Other Controls for
Drill Presses 
For drill presses, you must be protected from the
rotating chuck and swarf that is produced by thedrill bit.  Guarding at the point-of-operation is diffi-cult because of the nature of the drilling press. Thefollowing primary safeguarding methods can beinstalled to guard the operator and other employ-ees from rotating parts, flying chips, and cuttings:
•  Specifically designed shields can be attached to
the quill and used to guard this area. For exam-ple, telescopic shielding that retracts as the drillbit contacts the piece or a more universal-typeshield can be applied.
•  Automatic machines and high-production ma-
chines could have enclosures designed andinstalled to guard the employee from the entiredrilling operation. 
•  Install guarding over the motor, belts, and pul-
leys.
•  Install an adjustable guard to cover the unused
portion of the bit and chuck above the materialbeing worked. 
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement pri-mary safeguarding or alone or in combinationwhen primary safeguarding methods are not feasi-ble:
•  Automatic machines and high-production
machines could use barricades to separate theemployee from the entire drilling operation.
•  Develop and implement safe work (operating)
practices, such as removing the chuck immedi-ately after each use, for drill press operationsand conduct periodic inspections to ensure com-pliance.
•  Train and supervise all operators until they can
work safely on their own.
•  Use the drill press only for its intended purposes.
42
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration•  Instruct employees not to wear gloves, jewelry,
or loose-fitting clothing while operating a drillpress and to secure long hair in a net or cap.
•  Make sure that operators secure material to the
drill press bed with clamps (work-holding equip-ment) before drilling, so that the material willnot spin and strike the operator. The operatorshould not manually secure the work to the drillpress bed while drilling holes.
•  Do not adjust the drill press while the drill bit is
still rotating. 
•  Replace projecting chucks and set screws with
non-projecting safety-bit chucks and set screws.
•  Cover operator controls so that the drill press
cannot be turned on accidentally. 
•  Shut off the drill press when not in use or when
left unattended for any period of time.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.
Minor Servicing   
At times, OSHA recognizes that some minor
servicing may have to be performed during nor-mal production operations, so a lockout/tagoutexception is allowed. See the 29 CFR1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note, for details. For example,minor drill press tool changes and adjustmentsmay be performed without lockout/tagout if themachine’s electrical disconnect or control (on/off)switches control all the hazardous energy andare: 1) properly designed and applied in accor-dance with good engineering practice; 2) placedin an off (open) position; and 3) under the exclu-sive control of the employee performing theminor servicing task.    
Source:  29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note.
Cord- and Plug-connected Electric Equipment    
The OSHA LOTO standard would not apply when
employees are performing servicing and mainte-nance work on a cord- and plug-connected drillpress if the press is unplugged and the plug is inthe exclusive control of the employee performingthe task.  The employee would be able to controlthe press from being energized by controlling theattachment plug.
Source:  29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii)(A).\nApplicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines.
•  29 CFR 1910.213, Woodworking machinery
requirements.
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus. 
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  OSHA Publication 3157, A Guide for Protecting
Workers from Woodworking Hazards (http://
www.osha.gov/Publication/osha3157.pdf)
•  ANSI B11.8-2001, Safety Requirements for
Manual Milling, Drilling and Boring Machineswith or without Automatic Control
•  ANSI O1.1-2004, Safety Requirements for
Woodworking Machinery
Hazards of Milling Machines      
Electric milling machines cut metal using a rotatingcutting device called a milling cutter. These ma-chines cut flat surfaces, angles, slots, grooves,shoulders, inclined surfaces, dovetails, andrecessed cuts. Cutters of different sizes and shapesare available for a wide variety of milling opera-tions.
Milling machines include knee-and-column
machines, bed-type or manufacturing machines,and special milling machines designed for specialapplications. Typical milling operations consist ofselecting and installing the appropriate milling cut-ter, loading a work-piece on the milling table, con-trolling the table movement to feed the part againstthe rotating milling cutter, and callipering or meas-uring the part. (See Figure 41 .) 
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 43Figure 41   Bed Mill
Some frequent causes of amputation from
milling machines include:
•  Loading or unloading parts and callipering or
measuring the milled part while the cutter is stillrotating; 
•  Operating milling machines with the safety door
selector switch on bypass;
•  Inspecting the milling machine gearbox with the
machine still operating;
•  Manually checking the machine for loose gears
(by removing the gearbox cover) while comput-erized cutting software program was operating;
•  Performing servicing and maintenance activities
such as setting up the machine, changing andlubricating parts, clearing jams, and removingexcess oil, chips, fines, turnings, or particleseither while the milling machine is stopped butstill energized, or while the cutter is still rotating;and
•  Getting jewelry or loose-fitting clothing entan-
gled in the rotating cutter. 
Case History #22
While replacing parts on a horizontal millingmachine, an employee shut off the machine,which put the revolving cutter in a neutral posi-tion. The employee, however, did not disengagethe clutch to stop the cutter and proceeded toreplace parts while the cutter was still moving.He amputated three fingers.
Control
System
Milling
BedMilling
Cutter\nCase History #23
An employee was using a milling machine to cutmetal samples to length.  After a part had beencut, the employee needed to gauge the part size.While he was checking the edge of the sample,the blade caught the tip of his glove, pulled hishand into the cutting area, and amputated hisright ring finger and part of his middle finger.  
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
Safeguarding and Other Controls for
Milling Machines  
The following primary safeguarding methods will
help protect you from point-of-operation and othermilling machine hazard areas:
•  Install guards (fixed, movable, and interlocked)
that enclose the milling cutter’s point-of-opera-tion;
•  Install properly applied safeguarding devices,
such as presence-sensing devices and two-handcontrol methods;
•  Install guards around the machine’s power
transmission components (such as drive mecha-nisms).
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement pri-mary safeguarding or alone or in combinationwhen primary safeguarding methods are not feasi-ble:
•  Use other safeguarding devices such as splash
shields, chip shields, or barriers if they provideeffective protection to the operator and when itis impractical to guard cutters without interfer-ing with normal production operations or creat-ing a more hazardous situation.
•  Install awareness devices, such as barriers and
warning signs, around the milling table.
•  Instruct operators not to use a jig or vise (work-
holding equipment) that prevents the point ofoperation guard from being adjusted appropri-ately.
•  Develop and implement safe (operating) work
procedures for machine operators, such as safework procedures for installing and using fixturesand tooling.
•  Instruct operators to place the jig or vise locking
arrangement so that force must be exerted awayfrom the cutter.
44
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration•  Ensure that all operators receive appropriate
safe work procedure training by experiencedoperators until they can work safely on theirown.
•  Instruct operators to move the work-holding
device back to a safe distance when loading orunloading parts and callipering or measuringthe work and not to perform these activitieswhile the cutter is still rotating unless the cutteris adequately guarded.
•  Instruct employees not to wear gloves, jewelry,
or loose-fitting clothing while operating a millingmachine and to secure long hair in a net or cap.
•  Prohibit operators from reaching around the cut-
ter or hob to remove chips while the machine isin motion or not locked or tagged out.
•  Conduct periodic inspections to ensure compli-
ance.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.
Minor Servicing   
At times, OSHA recognizes that some minor
servicing may have to be performed during nor-mal production operations, so a lockout/tagoutexception is allowed. See the 29 CFR1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note, for details. For example,minor milling machine tool changes and adjust-ments may be performed without lockout/tagoutif the machine’s electrical disconnect or control(on/off) switches control all the hazardous energyand are: 1) properly designed and applied inaccordance with good engineering practice; 2)placed in an off (open) position; and 3) under theexclusive control of the employee performing theminor servicing task.    
Source:  29 CFR 1910.147(a)(2)(ii) Note.
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout)
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus \nSources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  National Safety Council, Accident Prevention
Manual for Industrial Operations: Engineeringand Technology. 10th Ed. Itasca, IL
•  ANSI B11.8-2001, Safety Requirements for
Manual Milling, Drilling and Boring Machineswith or without Automatic Control
Hazards of Grinding Machines      
Grinding machines primarily alter the size, shape,and surface finish of metal by placing a work-pieceagainst a rotating abrasive surface or wheel. Grind-ing machines may also be used for grinding glass,ceramics, plastics, and rubber. 
Examples of grinding machines include abrasive
belt machines, abrasive cutoff machines, cylindricalgrinders, centerless grinders, gear grinders, internalgrinders, lapping machines, off-hand grinders, sur-face grinders, swing frame grinders, and threadgrinders. (See Figure 42 .)
Figure 42   Horizontal Surface Grinder
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 45Amputation injuries can occur when the opera-
tor’s hands enter the point of operation during thefollowing activities:
•  Bypassing the grinding machine safety switch
feature in order to clean the machine while it isrunning;
•  Wearing gloves while grinding, where it is possi-
ble to have the glove get caught between therevolving disc and the table;
•  Fixing a jammed grinder machine by turning
the m achine off, removing the blade guard and
reaching into the danger area before the bladesstop turning;
•  Operating a grinding machine with non-func-
tional interlocks and without the guard in place;
•  Using an incorrectly adjusted or missing work
rest or a poorly maintained or unbalanced abra-sive wheel; 
•  Adjusting the work rest, balancing the wheel,
cleaning the area around the abrasive wheel andloading and unloading parts or measuring partswhile the abrasive wheel is still rotating;
•  Attempting to stop a rotating abrasive wheel by
hand.
Case History #24
After grinding a piece of steel on an off-handgrinder, an employee turned off the machine andtried to stop the wheel with a piece of scrapsteel. His hand slipped and hit the rotating abra-sive wheel, amputating the tip of his left middlefinger.
Case History #25
An employee was operating a large surfacegrinder to grind a groove into a steel part in alarge pump repair shop. The part was securedwith a vise and placed on a magnetic table. Theemployee was trying to measure the groovewhile the table was moving back and forthbeneath the grinding wheel. The safe practice,both written and customary, is to disengage thehydraulics for the table and stop the wheelbefore reaching in to measure or remove a part.Though experienced at operating this machineand aware of the strict rule, the employeeattempted to take measurements while the tableand wheel were moving and ground off part ofhis left index finger.
Fixed
Guard
Grinding
BedGrinding
Wheel
Fixed
Guard\nSafeguarding and Other Controls for
Grinding Machines  
You can help prevent employee accidents and
injuries by using primary safeguarding methods.Here are some examples:
•  Install safety guards that cover the spindle end,
nut, and flange projections or otherwise ensureadequate operator protection;
•  Install adjustable and rigid work rests on off-
hand grinding machines; and
•  Install guards over power belts and drives.
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement primarysafeguarding or alone or in combination whenprimary safeguarding methods are not feasible:
•  Develop and implement safe work procedures
for grinding machine operations.  
•  Install warning and safety instruction signs.•  Ensure that all operators receive appropriate on-
the-job training and supervision until they canwork safely on their own.
•  Use abrasive discs and wheels that are correctly
rated for the grinder’s maximum operating spin-dle speed. The disc or wheel rating is marked onthe disc or wheel in surface feet per minute.
•  Inspect and sound test the grinding wheel to
ensure that it is not defective, unbalanced,loose, or too small.
•  Adjust the work rest to within 
1/8inch of the
wheel.
•  Do not wear gloves, jewelry, or loose-fitting
clothing while operating grinding machines andsecure long hair in a net or cap.
•  Do not adjust the guard or clean the grinding
machine while the abrasive wheel is still rotating.
•  Conduct periodic inspections to ensure compli-
ance.
•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.  
Cord- and Plug-connected Electric Equipment    
The OSHA LOTO standard would not apply when
employees are performing servicing and mainte-nance work on a cord- and plug-connected grind-ing machine if the grinder is unplugged and theplug is in the exclusive control of the employee performing the task. The employee would be
able to control the grinder from being energizedby controlling the attachment plug.
Applicable Standards   
•  ANSI B7.1-1970, Safety Code for the Use, Care
and Protection of Abrasive Wheels [incorporat-
ed by reference in 1910.94(b)(5)(i)(a),1910.215(b)(12) and 1910.218(j)(5)].
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.215, Abrasive wheel machinery. 
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus.
•  29 CFR 1926.303, Abrasive wheels and tools. 
Sources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  ANSI B7.1—2000, Use, Care, and Protection of
Abrasive Wheels.
•  ANSI B11.9—1975 (R2005), Safety Require-
ments for the Construction, Care, and Use ofGrinding Machines.
Hazards of Slitters      
Slitters use rotary knives to slit flat rolled metal,plastic film, paper, plastic, foam, and rubber as wellas other coiled or sheet-fed materials. Slitters rangefrom small hand-fed paper slitters to large-scaleautomated metal slitters, complete with metal pro-cessing and handling units such as unwinders andrewinders. Both light and heavy gauge slitters areavailable. (See Figure 43 .)
46
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration\nFigure 43  Paper Slitter
Amputations often occur when clothing or body
parts come in contact with slitter blades or getcaught in the movement of coils and rolls. Here aresome examples:
•  Employees can inadvertently get their fingers
and hands caught in the in-going nip points ofthe slitter or associated machinery such as re-winders.  
•  Gloves, jewelry, long hair and loose clothing
can get entan gled in in-going nip points or in
the rotary knives of the slitter.  
•  Employees can suffer an amputation when
clearing, adjusting, cleaning, or servicing theslitter while it is either still operating, or shutoff but still plugged in (energized).
Case History #26
An employee was operating a precision slittingmachine to slit a roll of aluminum. As the em-ployee reached into the machine to make anadjustment because the aluminum was not beingslit properly, the employee’s right arm got caughtin the slitter. A set of rollers pulled his arm andamputated his right thumb and forefinger.
Case History #27
An employee was feeding cardboard strips ontoslit steel as it was being coiled on a slittermachine. While the machine was operating, theemployee was placing the cardboard strips on thecoils. After reaching over the steel strips, thecoiled steel on the mandrel pulled his right arminto the machine and amputated it.
Source: OSHA IMIS Accident Investigation Database.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 47Safeguarding and Other Controls for
Slitters  
The following primary safeguards may be used to
protect employees from the hazardous portions ofthe slitter and auxiliary equipment:
•  Install a fixed or adjustable point-of-operation
guard to prevent inadvertent entry of body partsinto a hazardous area of the slitter system.  
•  Install a fixed point of operation guard to cover
the sides of the unwinder or rewinder to preventan employee’s hands or clothing from enteringinto the rollers. 
•  Properly applied presence-sensing devices (such
as light curtains, radio-frequency devices, safetymats) may be used to control employee exposureto certain types of hazards (such as the slitterknives’ point-of-operation hazard) by stoppingor preventing machine system operation in theevent any part of an employee’s body is detect-ed in a sensing field.
•  Install fixed or interlocked guards to cover other
moving parts of the machine such as the power-transmission apparatus. 
The following are some secondary safeguarding
methods, work practices, and complementaryequipment that may be used to supplement primarysafeguarding or alone or in combination whenprimary safeguarding methods are not feasible:
•  Use awareness devices, such as an awareness
barrier or fence (with an interlocking gate) andhazard warning/safety instruction signs aroundthe perimeter of the machine to alert people ofthe hazard and prevent unauthorized entry.
•  Awareness signals may also be used to alert
you of an existing or approaching hazard asthese devices issue a warning sound or providea visible warning light.
•  Restrict employee access to hazardous areas
through the application of safeguarding by loca-tion techniques – such as utilizing the facility lay-out (walls) and equipment location (elevation)for isolation purposes.
•  Develop and implement safe work procedures
for machine operators and conduct periodicinspections to ensure compliance.
•  Develop an operator training program to ensure
that all operators are knowledgeable and profi-cient in the safeguarding methods and workprocedures. Employees need to be supervisedon a regular basis to ensure that they are follow-ing the safety program requirements.
\nSources of Additional Information   
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Machine Guarding eTool (http://www.
osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/index.html)
•  OSHA Lockout/Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/ 
lototraining/index.htm)
•  ANSI B11.14—1996, Coil Slitting Machines
Safety Requirements for Construction, Careand Use
48
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration•  Perform servicing and maintenance under an
energy control program in accordance with theControl of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout) , 29
CFR 1910.147, standard.
Applicable Standards   
•  29 CFR 1910.147, Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout)
•  29 CFR 1910.212, General requirements for all
machines
•  29 CFR 1910.219, Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus\nSAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 49OSHA Assistance
OSHA can provide extensive help through a variety of
programs, including technical assistance about effec-tive safety and health programs, state plans, work-place consultations, voluntary protection programs,strategic partnerships, training and education, andmore. An overall commitment to workplace safety andhealth can add value to your business, to your work-place, and to your life.
Safety and Health Program Management Guidelines
Effective management of employee safety and health
protection is a decisive factor in reducing the extentand severity of work-related injuries and illnesses andtheir related costs. In fact, an effective safety andhealth program forms the basis of good employeeprotection and can save time and money (about $4for every dollar spent) and increase productivity and
reduce employee injuries, illnesses, and related work-ers’ compensation costs.
To assist employers and employees in developing
effective safety and health programs, OSHA pub-lished recommended Safety and Health ProgramManagement Guidelines (54 Federal Register (16):3904-3916, January 26, 1989). These voluntary guide-lines can be applied to all places of employment cov-ered by OSHA.
The guidelines identify four general elements criti-
cal to the development of a successful safety andhealth management system:
•  Management leadership and employee involvement,
•  Worksite analysis,
•  Hazard prevention and control, and
•  Safety and health training.
The guidelines recommend specific actions, under
each of these general elements, to achieve an effec-tive safety and health program. The Federal Register
notice is available online at www.osha.gov.   
State Programs
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSH
Act) encourages states to develop and operate theirown job safety and health plans.  OSHA approves andmonitors these plans. Twenty-four states, Puerto Ricoand the Virgin Islands currently operate approvedstate plans: 22 cover both private and public (stateand local government) employment; Connecticut,New Jersey, New York and the Virgin Islands coverthe public sector only.  States and territories with theirown OSHA-approved occupational safety and healthplans must adopt standards identical to, or at least aseffective as, the Federal OSHA standards.Consultation Services
Consultation assistance is available on request to
employers who want help in establishing and main-taining a safe and healthful workplace. Largely fundedby OSHA, the service is provided at no cost to theemployer. Primarily developed for smaller employerswith more hazardous operations, the consultationservice is delivered by state governments employingprofessional safety and health consultants. Compre-
hensive assistance includes an appraisal of all mech-anical systems, work practices, and occupational safe-ty and health hazards of the workplace and all aspectsof the employer’s present job safety and health pro-gram. In addition, the service offers assistance toemployers in developing and implementing an effec-tive safety and health program. No penalties are pro-posed or citations issued for hazards identified by theconsultant. OSHA provides consultation assistance tothe employer with the assurance that his or her nameand firm and any information about the workplace willnot be routinely reported to OSHA enforcement staff.
Under the consultation program, certain exemplary
employers may request participation in OSHA’s Safetyand Health Achievement Recognition Program(SHARP). Eligibility for participation in SHARP in-cludes receiving a comprehensive consultation visit,demonstrating exemplary achievements in workplacesafety and health by abating all identified hazards, anddeveloping an excellent safety and health program.
Employers accepted into SHARP may receive an
exemption from programmed inspections (not com-plaint or accident investigation inspections) for a peri-od of 1 year. For more information concerning consul-tation assistance, see OSHA’s website atwww.osha.gov.
Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP)
Voluntary Protection Programs and on-site consulta-
tion services, when coupled with an effective en-forcement program, expand employee protection tohelp meet the goals of the OSH Act. The VPPs moti-vate others to achieve excellent safety and healthresults in the same outstanding way as they estab-lish a cooperative relationship between employers,employees, and OSHA.
For additional information on VPP and how to
apply, contact the OSHA regional offices listed at theend of this publication.
Strategic Partnership Program
OSHA’s Strategic Partnership Program, the newest
member of OSHA’s cooperative programs, helpsencourage, assist, and recognize the efforts of part-ners to eliminate serious workplace hazards andachieve a high level of employee safety and health.Whereas OSHA’s Consultation Program and VPP entail\n50
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administrationone-on-one relationships between OSHA and individ-
ual worksites, most strategic partnerships seek tohave a broader impact by building cooperative rela-tionships with groups of employers and employees.These partnerships are voluntary, cooperative relation-ships between OSHA, employers, employee represen-tatives, and others (e.g., trade unions, trade and pro-fessional associations, universities, and other govern-ment agencies).  
For more information on this and other coopera-
tive programs, contact your nearest OSHA office, orvisit OSHA’s website at www.osha.gov.
Alliance Program
The Alliance Program enables organizations commit-
ted to workplace safety and health to collaborate withOSHA to prevent injuries and illnesses in the work-place.  OSHA and the Alliance participants worktogether to reach out to, educate, and lead thenation’s employers and their employees in improvingand advancing workplace safety and health. 
Groups that can form an Alliance with OSHA
include employers, labor unions, trade or professionalgroups, educational institutions and governmentagencies. In some cases, organizations may be build-ing on existing relationships with OSHA that weredeveloped through other cooperative programs. 
There are few formal program requirements for
Alliances and the agreements do not include anenforcement component. However, OSHA and theparticipating organizations must define, implement,and meet a set of short- and long-term goals that fallinto three categories: training and education; outreachand communication; and promotion of the nationaldialogue on workplace safety and health.
OSHA T raining and Education
OSHA area offices offer a variety of information serv-
ices, such as compliance assistance, technical advice,publications, audiovisual aids and speakers for specialengagements. OSHA’s Training Institute in ArlingtonHeights, IL, provides basic and advanced courses insafety and health for Federal and state complianceofficers, state consultants, Federal agency personnel,and private sector employers, employees, and theirrepresentatives.
The OSHA Training Institute also has established
OSHA Training Institute Education Centers to addressthe increased demand for its courses from the privatesector and from other federal agencies. These centersare nonprofit colleges, universities, and other organi-zations that have been selected after a competition forparticipation in the program.
OSHA also provides funds to nonprofit organiza-
tions, through grants, to conduct workplace trainingand education in subjects where OSHA believes thereis a lack of workplace training. Grants are awarded
annually.  Grant recipients are expected to contribute20 percent of the total grant cost.
For more information on grants, training, and edu-
cation, contact the OSHA Training Institute, Office ofTraining and Education, 2020 South Arlington Road,Arlington Heights, IL 60005, (847) 297-4810, or seeOutreach on OSHA’s website at www.osha.gov.  For
further information on any OSHA program, contactyour nearest OSHA regional office listed at the end ofthis publication.
Information Available Electronically
OSHA has a variety of materials and tools available on
its website at www.osha.gov.  These include electroniccompliance assistance tools, such as Safety and
Health Topics, eTools, Expert Advisors; r egulations,
directives and publications; videos and other informa-tion for employers and employees.  OSHA’s softwareprograms and compliance assistance tools walk youthrough challenging safety and health issues andcommon problems to find the best solutions for yourworkplace.
A wide variety of OSHA materials, including stan-
dards, interpretations, directives and more can bepurchased on CD-ROM from the U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office, Superintendent of Documents, toll-freephone (866) 512-1800.
OSHA Publications
OSHA has an extensive publications program. For a
listing of free or sales items, visit OSHA’s website atwww.osha.gov or contact the OSHA PublicationsOffice, U.S. Department of Labor, 200 ConstitutionAvenue, NW, N-3101, Washington, DC 20210:Telephone (202) 693-1888 or fax to (202) 693-2498. 
Contacting OSHA
To report an emergency, file a complaint, or seek
OSHA advice, assistance, or products, call (800) 321-OSHA or contact your nearest OSHA Regional or Areaoffice listed at the end of this publication. The tele-typewriter (TTY) number is (877) 889-5627.
Written correspondence can be mailed to the near-
est OSHA Regional or Area Office listed at the end ofthis publication or to OSHA’s national office at: U.S.Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, 200 Constitution Avenue, N.W.,Washington, DC 20210.
By visiting OSHA’s website at www.osha.gov, you
can also:• file a complaint online,• submit general inquiries about workplace safety
and health electronically, and
• find more information about OSHA and occupation-
al safety and health.\nSAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 51References
American National Standards Institute
•  ANSI B5.52M-1980 (R1994), Presses, General
Purpose, Single Point, Gap Type, MechanicalPower (Metric)
•  ANSI B5.37—1970 (R1994), External Cylindrical
Grinding Machines—Centerless
•  ANSI B5.42—198 (R1994), External Cylindrical
Grinding Machines—Universal
•  ANSI B7.1—2000, Use, Care, and Protection of
Abrasive Wheels
•  ANSI B11.1-2001, Safety Requirements for
Mechanical Power Presses
•  ANSI B11.3-2002, Safety Requirements for the
Construction, Care, and Use of Power PressBrakes
•  ANSI B11.4-2003, Safety Requirements for
Construction, Care, and Use of Shears
•  ANSI B11.8-2001, Safety Requirements for
Manual Milling, Drilling and Boring Machineswith or without Automatic Control
•  ANSI B11.9—1975 (R2005), Safety Requirements
for the Construction, Care, and Use of GrindingMachines 
•  ANSI B11.12-1996, Safety Requirements for
Construction, Care, and Use of Roll-Forming andRoll-Bending Machines
•  ANSI B11.14—1996, Coil Slitting Machines
Safety Requirements for Construction, Care andUse
•  ANSI B11.19-2003, Performance Criteria for
Safeguarding
•  ANSI B20.1-57, S afety Code for Conveyors,
Cableways, and Related Equipment [incorporat-
ed by reference in 1926.555(a)(8)]
•  ANSI B65.1-2005, Safety Standard—Printing
Press Systems
•  ANSI B65.2-2005, Binding and Finishing
Systems
•  ANSI O1.1-2004, Safety Requirements for
Woodworking MachineryAmerican National Standards Institute/
Conveyor Equipment ManufacturersAssociation
•  ANSI/CEMA 350-2003, Screw Conveyors for Bulk
Material
•  ANSI/CEMA 401-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors —Roller Conveyors—Non-powered
•  ANSI/CEMA 402-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Belt Conveyors
•  ANSI/CEMA 403-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Belt Driven Live Roller Conveyors
•  ANSI/CEMA 404-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Chain Driven Live Roller Conveyors
•  ANSI/CEMA 405-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Slat Conveyors
•  ANSI/CEMA 406-2003, Unit Handling
Conveyors—Line-shaft Driven Live RollerConveyors
American National Standards Institute/
American Society of MechanicalEngineers
•  ANSI/ASME B20.1-2003, Safety Standard for
Conveyors and Related Equipment
National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health
•  NIOSH Current Intelligence Bulletin (CIB) 49,
Injuries and Amputations Resulting from Workwith Mechanical Power Presses (May 22, 1987)
National Safety Council
•  National Safety Council, Accident Prevention
Manual for Industrial Operations: Engineeringand Technology. 9th ed. Itasca, IL 
•  National Safety Council, Accident Prevention
Manual for Business and Industry: Engineeringand Technology 11th ed. Itasca, IL\n52
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationOccupational Safety and Health
Administration Standards
•  29 CFR 1910.147— Control of hazardous energy
(lockout/tagout).
•  29 CFR 1910.211— Definitions. 
•  29 CFR 1910.212— General requirements for all
machines. 
•  29 CFR 1910.213— Woodworking machinery
requirements. 
•  29 CFR 1910.215— Abrasive wheel machinery.
•  29 CFR 1910.217— Mechanical power presses. 
•  29 CFR 1910.219— Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus. 
•  29 CFR 1926.300— General requirements. 
•  29 CFR 1926.301— Hand tools.
•  29 CFR 1926.302— Power-operated hand tools.
•  29 CFR 1926.303— Abrasive wheels and tools.
•  29 CFR 1926.304— Woodworking tools. 
•  29 CFR 1926.307— Mechanical power-transmis-
sion apparatus.
•  29 CFR 1926.555— Conveyors.
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration Instructions
•  OSHA Instruction CPL 03-00-003, National
Emphasis Program on Amputations
•  OSHA Instruction STD 01-12-021—29 CFR
1910.217, Mechanical Power Presses,
Clarifications (10/30/78)
•  OSHA Instruction CPL 02-01-025, Guidelines for
Point of Operation Guarding of Power PressBrakes
•  OSHA Instruction STD 01-05-019, Control of
Hazardous Energy (Lockout/Tagout)—InspectionProcedures and Interpretive GuidanceOccupational Safety and Health
Administration Training Programs
•  OSHA’s Lockout Tagout Interactive Training
Program (http://www.osha-slc.gov/dts/osta/loto-
training/index.htm)
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration Publications
•  OSHA Publication 3067, Concepts and
Techniques of Machine Safeguarding(http://www.osha.gov/Publications/Mach_Safeguard/toc.html)
•  OSHA Publication 3120 - Control of Hazardous
Energy (Lockout/Tagout)
•  OSHA Publication 3157 - A Guide for Protecting
Workers from Woodworking Hazards(http://www.osha.gov/Publication/osha3157.pdf)
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration Topic Pages
•  Safety and Health Topics – Control of Hazardous
Energy – Lockout/Tagout (http://www.osha.gov/
SLTC/controlhazardousenergy/index.html)
•  Safety and Health Topics – Machine Guarding
(http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/machineguarding/index.html)\nSAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 53Appendix A.  
Amputation Hazards Not
Covered in this Guide
The following amputation hazards and related
activities are not specifically covered in detail in thisdocument. They are either covered in other OSHApublications or specific OSHA standards. Whileyou may find the general hazard recognition andmachine guarding concepts presented in theRecognizing Amputations Hazards and ControllingAmputation Hazards sections of this document
helpful, please refer to the applicable topic-specificresources and standards listed in the reference sec-tion of this publication for a complete discussion ofthese hazards. 
Amputation Hazards Associated 
with Saws
Saws are the top source of amputations in whole-
sale and retail trade and in the construction indus-try. Stationary saws, such as band, radial arm andtable saws, account for a substantial number ofamputations in the workplace. Sawing machineryused for woodworking applications is not specifical-ly addressed in this guide. 
You can find specific guidance on these saws in
OSHA Publication 3157, A Guide for Protecting
Workers from Woodworking Hazards ; 29 CFR
1910.213, Woodworking machinery requirements ;
29 CFR 1910.243, Guarding of portable powered
tools ; and 29 CFR 1926.304, Woodworking tools .
For additional information on how to safeguardsaws and implement hazardous energy controlpractices, you can find guidance at OSHA’sMachine Guarding eTool section for Saws (http://
www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/saws.html) Also, the national consensus standard, ANSIO1.1-2004, Safety Requirements for W oodworking
Machinery , may provide you with valuable infor-
mation on how to prevent amputations.  Amputation Hazards Associated with
Plastics Machinery
Plastics processing machines are complex pieces
of equipment that require safeguarding and a haz-ardous energy control program. Serious injuries,including fatalities, amputations, avulsions, burnsand cuts can occur, especially during servicing andmaintenance work. You can find specific guidanceat OSHA’s “Machine Guarding” eTool section for“Plastics Machinery” (http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/machineguarding/plastics/h_injectmold.html).
Amputation Hazards in Agriculture and
Maritime Operations
Requirements for machine guarding in agricultureoperations are contained in the Standards forAgriculture, 29 CFR Part 1928 Subpart D— Safety for
Agricultural Equipment , and requirements for
machine guarding in maritime operations can befound in the Shipyard Employment Standards, 29CFR Part 1915 Subpart H— Tools and Related
Equipment , the Marine Terminals Standard, 29 CFR
Part 1917 Subpart G— Machine Guarding , and the
Longshoring Standard, 29 CFR Part 1918 SubpartI—General Working Conditions .
Additional Health and Safety Hazards  
Other health and safety hazards associated with
using stationary machines,  but not addressed  inthis guide, include noise, vibration, ergonomicstresses, exposure to hazardous chemicals (e.g.,metalworking fluids) and dust, electric hazards, andflying objects.
Please visit the OSHA website at www.osha.gov
for more information on how to recognize and con-trol these hazards.\n54
Occupational Safety and 
Health AdministrationAppendix B.  
Amputation Hazards
Associated with OtherEquipment and Activities
Although machinery is associated with amputations
more frequently than any other source, amputa-tions can result from other sources. This appendixbriefly identifies other equipment and activitiesassociated with amputations:
•  Powered and Non-Powered Hand T ools.
Portable hand tools, such as saws, grinders,shears, and bolt cutters are associated withamputations in the construction, retail trade,and ser vices industries. 
•  Material Handling. Amputations related to
manual material handling tasks often resultwhen heavy or sharp objects fall from an elevat-ed surface or shift during transfer. Amputationoften occurs when the employee attempts tolimit the movement of, or damage to, materialas it shifts or falls.
•  Forklifts. Amputation hazards related to forklift
operation and use include employees beingtrapped or pinned between the forklift andanother object; struck or run over by the forklift;struck by falling or shifting loads or overturningforklifts.•  Doors and Covers. Amputation hazards are not
limited to mechanical equipment or heavyloads.  Doors also have the potential to ampu-tate fingers. These injuries typically result whena door closes while a person’s hands are in thedoorjamb. Manhole covers, commercial garbagedisposal covers, and tank or bin covers can alsoamputate fingers and toes.
•  T rash Compactors. Many businesses use small
trash compactors for reducing the volume ofwastes such as cardboard. Often these com-pactors are not properly guarded and employ-ees are not properly trained in their use. Themajority of these amputations result fromemployees being struck by the ram/piston eitherduring the initiating stroke or the return stroke.The ram/piston should be guarded if any part ofan operator’s body is exposed to the dangerarea during the operating cycle. Likewise, beforereaching into any trash compactor the operatorshould de-energize and lock out the machine.\nAppendix C.
OSHA Regional Offices
Region I
(CT,* ME, MA, NH, RI, VT*)                        JFK Federal Building, Room E340Boston, MA 02203(617) 565-9860
Region II
(NJ,* NY,* PR,* VI*)201 Varick Street, Room 670New York, NY 10014(212) 337-2378
Region III
(DE, DC, MD,* PA, VA,* WV)The Curtis Center170 S. Independence Mall WestSuite 740 WestPhiladelphia, PA 19106-3309(215) 861-4900
Region IV 
(AL, FL, GA, KY,* MS, NC,* SC,* TN*)61 Forsyth Street, SWAtlanta, GA 30303(404) 562-2300
Region V
(IL, IN,* MI,* MN,* OH, WI)230 South Dearborn Street Room 3244Chicago, IL 60604(312) 353-2220
Region VI
(AR, LA, NM,* OK, TX)525 Griffin Street, Room 602Dallas, TX 75202(214) 767-4731 or 4736 x224Region VII
(IA,* KS, MO, NE)City Center Square1100 Main Street, Suite 800Kansas City, MO 64105(816) 426-5861
Region VIII
(CO, MT, ND, SD, UT,* WY*)1999 Broadway, Suite 1690PO Box 46550Denver, CO 80202-5716(720) 264-6550
Region IX 
(American Samoa, AZ,* CA,* HI,* NV,* Northern Mariana Islands)71 Stevenson Street, Room 420San Francisco, CA 94105(415) 975-4310
Region X
(AK,* ID, OR,* WA*)1111 Third Avenue, Suite 715Seattle, WA 98101-3212(206) 553-5930
* These states and territories operate their own
OSHA-approved job safety and health programsand cover state and local government employeesas well as private sector employees.  TheConnecticut, New Jersey, New York and VirginIslands plans cover public employees only. Stateswith approved programs must have standards thatare identical to, or at least as effective as, theFederal standards.
Note: To get contact information for OSHA Area
Offices, OSHA-approved State Plans and OSHAConsultation Projects, please visit us online atwww.osha.gov or call us at 1-800-321-OSHA.
SAFEGUARDING EQUIPMENT AND PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM AMPUTATIONS 55\n56
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration\n\n