www.tuv.com(including the corrigendum to the regulation EU 2023/1230 
from 04.07.2023).Conformity with the new Machinery  
Regulation EU 2023/1230
Since June 14, 2023, the new Machinery Regulation has been published and will replace the current 
Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC in Europe. The Machinery Regulation specifies a 42-month transition 
period and the change from Directive to Regulation will take place on the effective date of January 20, 
2027.  All machinery placed on the market or put into service before January 20, 2027 must be still CE 
marked in accordance with the Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC.  
From January 20, 2027, the CE marking of machinery or assessment of partly completed machinery 
will be mandatory under the Machinery Regulation EU 2023/1230.
\nwww.tuv.com
® TÜV, TUEV and TUV are registered trademarks. Utilisation and application requires prior approval.. DE23_S01__2300494WHAT IS NEW?  
Many requirements of the Machinery Regulation are only 
described in more detail and more clearly. But there are 
also some changes in content compared to the Machinery 
Directive of 2006. The requirements for functional safety 
have been expanded (e.g., software). In addition, there are 
also the aspects of cyber security and artificial intelligence.
Safety requirements for autonomous (mobile) machines 
have been added.  
The obligations of the economic operators (manufacturer, 
authorized representative, importer and distributor) are 
described in Chapter II of the regulation.  Those are presen ted very clearly for the individual  
economic operators in separate articles.  
Annex I of the regulation lists the machines for which a 
special conformity assessment procedure is prescribed. 
This list is now divided into:
 ·Part A (obligatory involvement of a notified body) and a
 ·Part B (procedure as for 2006/42/EC, Annex IV  
machinery).
The diagram shows the possible conformity assessment 
procedures for the various categories of machinery.
Machinery or related products listed in Annex I
Category Annex I, part B  
(e.g. Presses, Woodworking, Injection Molding, …)Category Annex I, part A  
(6 Categories including e.g.  
Vehicle lifts, Safety-Systems  
containing self-evolving  
behavior, …)Full compliance to harmonized  
standardsNo only partly compliance to 
harmonized standards
a) Module B (Annex VII) EC Type Examination AND  
Module C (Annex VIII) Conformity to Type Based on Internal Production Control
b) Module H (Annex IX) Full Quality Assurance
c) Module G (Annex X) Unit VerificationAll other   
machinery and
related products
Module A (Annex VI) Internal Production Con -
trol Voluntary testing by TÜV Rheinland and 
Certificate of Conformity possibleInvolvement of a Notified Body mandatory (e.g. TÜV Rheinland LGA Products GmbH)  
CE with Number of Notified Body  (e.g. CE 0197 TÜV Rheinland LGA Products GmbH or CE 
1008 TÜV Rheinland Intercert (Hungary))
The modules for the conformity assessment procedures 
(Annexes VI - XI) are strictly aligned with the NLF (New 
Legislative Framework) of the EU.  
In terms of content, nothing relevant has changed in the 
procedures „Internal production control“, „EC type  
examination“ and „Full quality assurance“.
The module for „Type based conformity with internal pro -
duction control“ is new. This procedure is carried out by the 
manufacturer on his own responsibility and based on the 
EC type examination.  
 For complex, customer-specific machines, the module 
„individual testing“ has been introduced. Here, the Notified 
Body tests and certifies an individual machine whereupon 
the serial number of the machine is listed on the certificate.
Use the transition period to adapt your machinery and 
processes in accordance with Regulation EU 2023/1230. 
At TÜV Rheinland, we will be happy to carry out the testing 
of your current machinery in accordance with the essential 
health and safety requirements of Annex III and additionally,  
we offer you the option of having Annex III of the  
Machinery Regulation tested already for new machine 
developments. Talk to us today!
CONTACT US
TÜV Rheinland LGA Products GmbH
Tillystr. 2, 90431 Nuremberg, Germany
Tel. +49 911 655-5225
service@de.tuv.com